PROLOGUE

9

only in warm sheltered places like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor
call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only for the fragrance of its ﬂowers.
From that land it must have been carried up the Greenway during
the long centuries between the coming of Elendil and our own days.
But even the Dúnedain of Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits ﬁrst
put it into pipes. Not even the Wizards ﬁrst thought of that before
we did. Though one Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago,
and became as skilful in it as in all other things that he put his
mind to.’
3
Of the Ordering of the Shire
The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings already
referred to, North, South, East, and West; and these again each into
a number of folklands, which still bore the names of some of the old
leading families, although by the time of this history these names
were no longer found only in their proper folklands. Nearly all Tooks
still lived in the Tookland, but that was not true of many other
families, such as the Bagginses or the Bofﬁns. Outside the Farthings
were the East and West Marches: the Buckland (p. 98); and the
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1452.
The Shire at this time had hardly any ‘government’. Families for
the most part managed their own affairs. Growing food and eating
it occupied most of their time. In other matters they were, as a rule,
generous and not greedy, but contented and moderate, so that estates,
farms, workshops, and small trades tended to remain unchanged for
generations.
There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concerning the
high king at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, away north of the
Shire. But there had been no king for nearly a thousand years, and
even the ruins of Kings’ Norbury were covered with grass. Yet the
Hobbits still said of wild folk and wicked things (such as trolls) that
they had not heard of the king. For they attributed to the king of old
all their essential laws; and usually they kept the laws of free will,
because they were The Rules (as they said), both ancient and just.
It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent; for the
ofﬁce of Thain had passed to them (from the Oldbucks) some centuries before, and the chief Took had borne that title ever since.
The Thain was the master of the Shire-moot, and captain of the
Shire-muster and the Hobbitry-in-arms; but as muster and moot
were only held in times of emergency, which no longer occurred, the
Thainship had ceased to be more than a nominal dignity. The Took
family was still, indeed, accorded a special respect, for it remained

PROLOGUE

11

4
Of the Finding of the Ring
As is told in The Hobbit, there came one day to Bilbo’s door the great
Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none
other, indeed, than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant of kings, and
his twelve companions in exile. With them he set out, to his own
lasting astonishment, on a morning of April, it being then the year
1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great treasure, the dwarf-hoards
of the Kings under the Mountain, beneath Erebor in Dale, far off in
the East. The quest was successful, and the Dragon that guarded the
hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle of
Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many deeds of
renown were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later
history, or earned more than a note in the long annals of the Third
Age, but for an ‘accident’ by the way. The party was assailed by
Orcs in a high pass of the Misty Mountains as they went towards
Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was lost for a while in the
black orc-mines deep under the mountains, and there, as he groped
in vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the ﬂoor of
a tunnel. He put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere luck.
Trying to ﬁnd his way out, Bilbo went on down to the roots of
the mountains, until he could go no further. At the bottom of the
tunnel lay a cold lake far from the light, and on an island of rock in the
water lived Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a
small boat with his large ﬂat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes
and catching blind ﬁsh with his long ﬁngers, and eating them raw.
He ate any living thing, even orc, if he could catch it and strangle it
without a struggle. He possessed a secret treasure that had come to
him long ages ago, when he still lived in the light: a ring of gold that
made its wearer invisible. It was the one thing he loved, his ‘Precious’,
and he talked to it, even when it was not with him. For he kept it
hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he was hunting or
spying on the orcs of the mines.
Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring had been
on him when they met; but it was not, and the hobbit held in his
hand an Elvish knife, which served him as a sword. So to gain time
Gollum challenged Bilbo to the Riddle-game, saying that if he asked
a riddle which Bilbo could not guess, then he would kill him and eat
him; but if Bilbo defeated him, then he would do as Bilbo wished:
he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.
Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go
on nor back, Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another
many riddles. In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it

PROLOGUE

13

went to fetch it from his island he found the treasure was gone: a
magic ring, which had been given to him long ago on his birthday.
Bilbo guessed that this was the very ring that he had found, and as
he had won the game, it was already his by right. But being in a tight
place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum show him the way
out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo set down
in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the
original Red Book, as it did in several of the copies and abstracts.
But many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived
no doubt from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned
the truth, though they seem to have been unwilling to delete anything
actually written by the old hobbit himself.
Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo’s ﬁrst story, as soon as he
heard it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which
for a while strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think
the truth important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also
thought it important, and disturbing, to ﬁnd that the good hobbit
had not told the truth from the ﬁrst: quite contrary to his habit. The
idea of a ‘present’ was not mere hobbitlike invention, all the same.
It was suggested to Bilbo, as he confessed, by Gollum’s talk that he
overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call the ring his ‘birthday-present’,
many times. That also Gandalf thought strange and suspicious; but
he did not discover the truth in this point for many more years, as
will be seen in this book.
Of Bilbo’s later adventures little more need be said here. With the
help of the ring he escaped from the orc-guards at the gate and
rejoined his companions. He used the ring many times on his quest,
chieﬂy for the help of his friends; but he kept it secret from them as
long as he could. After his return to his home he never spoke of it
again to anyone, save Gandalf and Frodo; and no one else in the
Shire knew of its existence, or so he believed. Only to Frodo did he
show the account of his Journey that he was writing.
His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his ﬁreplace, and his coat of
marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon-hoard, he
lent to a museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But
he kept in a drawer at Bag End the old cloak and hood that he had
worn on his travels; and the ring, secured by a ﬁne chain, remained
in his pocket.
He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his
ﬁfty-second year (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable occurred in
the Shire until Mr. Baggins began the preparations for the celebration

24

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I don’t
doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn’t
enough to ﬁll tunnels. But my lad Sam will know more about that.
He’s in and out of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days, he
is, and he listens to all Mr. Bilbo’s tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him
his letters – meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope no harm will
come of it.
‘Elves and Dragons! I says to him. Cabbages and potatoes are better
for me and you. Don’t go getting mixed up in the business of your betters,
or you’ll land in trouble too big for you, I says to him. And I might say
it to others,’ he added with a look at the stranger and the miller.
But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend of
Bilbo’s wealth was now too ﬁrmly ﬁxed in the minds of the younger
generation of hobbits.
‘Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at
ﬁrst,’ argued the miller, voicing common opinion. ‘He’s often away
from home. And look at the outlandish folk that visit him: dwarves
coming at night, and that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf, and all.
You can say what you like, Gaffer, but Bag End’s a queer place, and
its folk are queerer.’
‘And you can say what you like, about what you know no more
of than you do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,’ retorted the Gaffer, disliking the miller even more than usual. ‘If that’s being queer, then we
could do with a bit more queerness in these parts. There’s some not
far away that wouldn’t offer a pint of beer to a friend, if they lived
in a hole with golden walls. But they do things proper at Bag End.
Our Sam says that everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and
there’s going to be presents, mark you, presents for all – this very
month as is.’
That very month was September, and as ﬁne as you could ask. A
day or two later a rumour (probably started by the knowledgeable
Sam) was spread about that there were going to be ﬁreworks – ﬁreworks, what is more, such as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh
on a century, not indeed since the Old Took died.
Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking waggon
laden with odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening
and toiled up the Hill to Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out
of lamplit doors to gape at it. It was driven by outlandish folk, singing
strange songs: dwarves with long beards and deep hoods. A few of
them remained at Bag End. At the end of the second week in September a cart came in through Bywater from the direction of Brandywine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all alone.

A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY

25

He wore a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, and a silver scarf.
He had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows that stuck out beyond
the brim of his hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through
Hobbiton and right up the hill. It had a cargo of ﬁreworks, as they
rightly guessed. At Bilbo’s front door the old man began to unload:
there were great bundles of ﬁreworks of all sorts and shapes, each
labelled with a large red G
and the elf-rune, .
That was Gandalf ’s mark, of course, and the old man was Gandalf
the Wizard, whose fame in the Shire was due mainly to his skill with
ﬁres, smokes, and lights. His real business was far more difﬁcult and
dangerous, but the Shire-folk knew nothing about it. To them he
was just one of the ‘attractions’ at the Party. Hence the excitement
of the hobbit-children. ‘G for Grand!’ they shouted, and the old man
smiled. They knew him by sight, though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but neither they nor any
but the oldest of their elders had seen one of his ﬁrework displays –
they now belonged to a legendary past.
When the old man, helped by Bilbo and some dwarves, had
ﬁnished unloading, Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single
squib or cracker was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the
onlookers.
‘Run away now!’ said Gandalf. ‘You will get plenty when the time
comes.’ Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door was
shut. The young hobbits stared at the door in vain for a while, and
then made off, feeling that the day of the party would never come.
Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window
of a small room looking out west on to the garden. The late afternoon
was bright and peaceful. The ﬂowers glowed red and golden: snapdragons and sunﬂowers, and nasturtians trailing all over the turf walls
and peeping in at the round windows.
‘How bright your garden looks!’ said Gandalf.
‘Yes,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear
old Shire; but I think I need a holiday.’
‘You mean to go on with your plan then?’
‘I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven’t changed it.’
‘Very well. It is no good saying any more. Stick to your plan –
your whole plan, mind – and I hope it will turn out for the best, for
you, and for all of us.’
‘I hope so. Anyway I mean to enjoy myself on Thursday, and have
my little joke.’
‘Who will laugh, I wonder?’ said Gandalf, shaking his head.
‘We shall see,’ said Bilbo.
*
*
*

26

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts.
There might have been some grumbling about ‘dealing locally’, but
that very week orders began to pour out of Bag End for every kind
of provision, commodity, or luxury that could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in the neighbourhood. People became
enthusiastic; and they began to tick off the days on the calendar; and
they watched eagerly for the postman, hoping for invitations.
Before long the invitations began pouring out, and the Hobbiton
post-ofﬁce was blocked, and the Bywater post-ofﬁce was snowed
under, and voluntary assistant postmen were called for. There was a
constant stream of them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of
polite variations on Thank you, I shall certainly come.
A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: no admittance
except on party business. Even those who had, or pretended to
have Party Business were seldom allowed inside. Bilbo was busy:
writing invitations, ticking off answers, packing up presents, and
making some private preparations of his own. From the time of
Gandalf ’s arrival he remained hidden from view.
One morning the hobbits woke to ﬁnd the large ﬁeld, south of
Bilbo’s front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents and pavilions. A special entrance was cut into the bank leading to the road,
and wide steps and a large white gate were built there. The three
hobbit-families of Bagshot Row, adjoining the ﬁeld, were intensely
interested and generally envied. Old Gaffer Gamgee stopped even
pretending to work in his garden.
The tents began to go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so
big that the tree that grew in the ﬁeld was right inside it, and stood
proudly near one end, at the head of the chief table. Lanterns were
hung on all its branches. More promising still (to the hobbits’ mind):
an enormous open-air kitchen was erected in the north corner of the
ﬁeld. A draught of cooks, from every inn and eating-house for miles
around, arrived to supplement the dwarves and other odd folk that
were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose to its height.
Then the weather clouded over. That was on Wednesday the eve
of the Party. Anxiety was intense. Then Thursday, September the
22nd, actually dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, ﬂags
were unfurled and the fun began.
Bilbo Baggins called it a party, but it was really a variety of entertainments rolled into one. Practically everybody living near was
invited. A very few were overlooked by accident, but as they turned
up all the same, that did not matter. Many people from other parts
of the Shire were also asked; and there were even a few from outside
the borders. Bilbo met the guests (and additions) at the new white
gate in person. He gave away presents to all and sundry – the latter

A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY

27

were those who went out again by a back way and came in again by
the gate. Hobbits give presents to other people on their own birthdays.
Not very expensive ones, as a rule, and not so lavishly as on this
occasion; but it was not a bad system. Actually in Hobbiton and
Bywater every day in the year was somebody’s birthday, so that every
hobbit in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present at least
once a week. But they never got tired of them.
On this occasion the presents were unusually good. The hobbitchildren were so excited that for a while they almost forgot about
eating. There were toys the like of which they had never seen before,
all beautiful and some obviously magical. Many of them had indeed
been ordered a year before, and had come all the way from the
Mountain and from Dale, and were of real dwarf-make.
When every guest had been welcomed and was ﬁnally inside the
gate, there were songs, dances, music, games, and, of course, food
and drink. There were three ofﬁcial meals: lunch, tea, and dinner
(or supper). But lunch and tea were marked chieﬂy by the fact that
at those times all the guests were sitting down and eating together.
At other times there were merely lots of people eating and drinking
–continuously from elevenses until six-thirty, when the ﬁreworks
started.
The ﬁreworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought by
him, but designed and made by him; and the special effects, set
pieces, and ﬂights of rockets were let off by him. But there was also
a generous distribution of squibs, crackers, backarappers, sparklers,
torches, dwarf-candles, elf-fountains, goblin-barkers and thunderclaps. They were all superb. The art of Gandalf improved with age.
There were rockets like a ﬂight of scintillating birds singing with
sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their
leaves opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their
shining branches dropped glowing ﬂowers down upon the astonished
hobbits, disappearing with a sweet scent just before they touched their
upturned faces. There were fountains of butterﬂies that ﬂew glittering
into the trees; there were pillars of coloured ﬁres that rose and turned
into eagles, or sailing ships, or a phalanx of ﬂying swans; there was
a red thunderstorm and a shower of yellow rain; there was a forest
of silver spears that sprang suddenly into the air with a yell like an
embattled army, and came down again into the Water with a hiss
like a hundred hot snakes. And there was also one last surprise, in
honour of Bilbo, and it startled the hobbits exceedingly, as Gandalf
intended. The lights went out. A great smoke went up. It shaped
itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow at the
summit. It spouted green and scarlet ﬂames. Out ﬂew a red-golden
dragon – not life-size, but terribly life-like: ﬁre came from his jaws,

32

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

bag that was standing there, already nearly full. Into the envelope he
slipped his golden ring, and its ﬁne chain, and then sealed it, and
addressed it to Frodo. At ﬁrst he put it on the mantelpiece, but
suddenly he removed it and stuck it in his pocket. At that moment
the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in.
‘Hullo!’ said Bilbo. ‘I wondered if you would turn up.’
‘I am glad to ﬁnd you visible,’ replied the wizard, sitting down in a
chair, ‘I wanted to catch you and have a few ﬁnal words. I suppose you
feel that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?’
‘Yes, I do,’ said Bilbo. ‘Though that ﬂash was surprising: it quite
startled me, let alone the others. A little addition of your own, I
suppose?’
‘It was. You have wisely kept that ring secret all these years, and
it seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that
would seem to explain your sudden vanishment.’
‘And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,’
laughed Bilbo, ‘but I expect you know best, as usual.’
‘I do – when I know anything. But I don’t feel too sure about this
whole affair. It has now come to the ﬁnal point. You have had your
joke, and alarmed or offended most of your relations, and given the
whole Shire something to talk about for nine days, or ninety-nine
more likely. Are you going any further?’
‘Yes, I am. I feel I need a holiday, a very long holiday, as I have
told you before. Probably a permanent holiday: I don’t expect I shall
return. In fact, I don’t mean to, and I have made all arrangements.
‘I am old, Gandalf. I don’t look it, but I am beginning to feel it
in my heart of hearts. Well-preserved indeed!’ he snorted. ‘Why, I feel
all thin, sort of stretched, if you know what I mean: like butter that
has been scraped over too much bread. That can’t be right. I need
a change, or something.’
Gandalf looked curiously and closely at him. ‘No, it does not
seem right,’ he said thoughtfully. ‘No, after all I believe your plan is
probably the best.’
‘Well, I’ve made up my mind, anyway. I want to see mountains
again, Gandalf – mountains; and then ﬁnd somewhere where I can
rest. In peace and quiet, without a lot of relatives prying around, and
a string of confounded visitors hanging on the bell. I might ﬁnd
somewhere where I can ﬁnish my book. I have thought of a nice
ending for it: and he lived happily ever after to the end of his days.’
Gandalf laughed. ‘I hope he will. But nobody will read the book,
however it ends.’
‘Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as
far as it has gone. You’ll keep an eye on Frodo, won’t you?’
‘Yes, I will – two eyes, as often as I can spare them.’

A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY

33

‘He would come with me, of course, if I asked him. In fact he
offered to once, just before the party. But he does not really want
to, yet. I want to see the wild country again before I die, and the
Mountains; but he is still in love with the Shire, with woods and
ﬁelds and little rivers. He ought to be comfortable here. I am leaving
everything to him, of course, except a few oddments. I hope he will
be happy, when he gets used to being on his own. It’s time he was
his own master now.’
‘Everything?’ said Gandalf. ‘The ring as well? You agreed to that,
you remember.’
‘Well, er, yes, I suppose so,’ stammered Bilbo.
‘Where is it?’
‘In an envelope, if you must know,’ said Bilbo impatiently. ‘There
on the mantelpiece. Well, no! Here it is in my pocket!’ He hesitated.
‘Isn’t that odd now?’ he said softly to himself. ‘Yet after all, why not?
Why shouldn’t it stay there?’
Gandalf looked again very hard at Bilbo, and there was a gleam
in his eyes.‘I think, Bilbo,’ he said quietly, ‘I should leave it behind.
Don’t you want to?’
‘Well yes – and no. Now it comes to it, I don’t like parting with
it at all, I may say. And I don’t really see why I should. Why do you
want me to?’ he asked, and a curious change came over his voice. It
was sharp with suspicion and annoyance. ‘You are always badgering
me about my ring; but you have never bothered me about the other
things that I got on my journey.’
‘No, but I had to badger you,’ said Gandalf. ‘I wanted the truth.
It was important. Magic rings are – well, magical; and they are rare
and curious. I was professionally interested in your ring, you may
say; and I still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go
wandering again. Also I think you have had it quite long enough.
You won’t need it any more, Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.’
Bilbo ﬂushed, and there was an angry light in his eyes. His kindly
face grew hard. ‘Why not?’ he cried. ‘And what business is it of yours,
anyway, to know what I do with my own things? It is my own. I
found it. It came to me.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no need to get angry.’
‘If I am it is your fault,’ said Bilbo. ‘It is mine, I tell you. My own.
My Precious. Yes, my Precious.’
The wizard’s face remained grave and attentive, and only a ﬂicker
in his deep eyes showed that he was startled and indeed alarmed. ‘It
has been called that before,’ he said, ‘but not by you.’
‘But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same
once. It’s not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.’
Gandalf stood up. He spoke sternly. ‘You will be a fool if you do,

34

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Bilbo,’ he said. ‘You make that clearer with every word you say. It
has got far too much hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go
yourself, and be free.’
‘I’ll do as I choose and go as I please,’ said Bilbo obstinately.
‘Now, now, my dear hobbit!’ said Gandalf. ‘All your long life we
have been friends, and you owe me something. Come! Do as you
promised: give it up!’
‘Well, if you want my ring yourself, say so!’ cried Bilbo. ‘But you
won’t get it. I won’t give my Precious away, I tell you.’ His hand
strayed to the hilt of his small sword.
Gandalf ’s eyes ﬂashed. ‘It will be my turn to get angry soon,’ he
said. ‘If you say that again, I shall. Then you will see Gandalf the
Grey uncloaked.’ He took a step towards the hobbit, and he seemed
to grow tall and menacing; his shadow ﬁlled the little room.
Bilbo backed away to the wall, breathing hard, his hand clutching
at his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another, and the air
of the room tingled. Gandalf ’s eyes remained bent on the hobbit.
Slowly his hands relaxed, and he began to tremble.
‘I don’t know what has come over you, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘You
have never been like this before. What is it all about? It is mine isn’t
it? I found it, and Gollum would have killed me, if I hadn’t kept it.
I’m not a thief, whatever he said.’
‘I have never called you one,’ Gandalf answered. ‘And I am not one
either. I am not trying to rob you, but to help you. I wish you would
trust me, as you used.’ He turned away, and the shadow passed. He
seemed to dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled.
Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. ‘I am sorry,’ he said. ‘But I felt
so queer. And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with
it any more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I
have felt it was like an eye looking at me. And I am always wanting
to put it on and disappear, don’t you know; or wondering if it is safe,
and pulling it out to make sure. I tried locking it up, but I found I
couldn’t rest without it in my pocket. I don’t know why. And I don’t
seem able to make up my mind.’
‘Then trust mine,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is quite made up. Go away
and leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will
look after him.’
Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he
sighed. ‘All right,’ he said with an effort. ‘I will.’ Then he shrugged
his shoulders, and smiled rather ruefully. ‘After all that’s what this
party business was all about, really: to give away lots of birthdaypresents, and somehow make it easier to give it away at the same
time. It hasn’t made it any easier in the end, but it would be a pity
to waste all my preparations. It would quite spoil the joke.’

A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY

35

‘Indeed it would take away the only point I ever saw in the affair,’
said Gandalf.
‘Very well,’ said Bilbo, ‘it goes to Frodo with all the rest.’ He drew
a deep breath. ‘And now I really must be starting, or somebody else
will catch me. I have said good-bye, and I couldn’t bear to do it all
over again.’ He picked up his bag and moved to the door.
‘You have still got the ring in your pocket,’ said the wizard.
‘Well, so I have!’ cried Bilbo. ‘And my will and all the other
documents too. You had better take it and deliver it for me. That
will be safest.’
‘No, don’t give the ring to me,’ said Gandalf. ‘Put it on the mantelpiece. It will be safe enough there, till Frodo comes. I shall wait for him.’
Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as he was about to set it by
the clock, his hand jerked back, and the packet fell on the ﬂoor.
Before he could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and set
it in its place. A spasm of anger passed swiftly over the hobbit’s face
again. Suddenly it gave way to a look of relief and a laugh.
‘Well, that’s that,’ he said. ‘Now I’m off !’
They went out into the hall. Bilbo chose his favourite stick from
the stand; then he whistled. Three dwarves came out of different
rooms where they had been busy.
‘Is everything ready?’ asked Bilbo. ‘Everything packed and labelled?’
‘Everything,’ they answered.
‘Well, let’s start then!’ He stepped out of the front-door.
It was a ﬁne night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He
looked up, snifﬁng the air. ‘What fun! What fun to be off again, off
on the Road with dwarves! This is what I have really been longing
for, for years! Good-bye!’ he said, looking at his old home and bowing
to the door. ‘Good-bye, Gandalf !’
‘Good-bye, for the present, Bilbo. Take care of yourself ! You are
old enough, and perhaps wise enough.’
‘Take care! I don’t care. Don’t you worry about me! I am as happy
now as I have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time
has come. I am being swept off my feet at last,’ he added, and then
in a low voice, as if to himself, he sang softly in the dark:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with eager feet,
Until it joins some larger way
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.

36

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He paused, silent for a moment. Then without another word he
turned away from the lights and voices in the ﬁeld and tents, and
followed by his three companions went round into his garden, and
trotted down the long sloping path. He jumped over a low place in
the hedge at the bottom, and took to the meadows, passing into the
night like a rustle of wind in the grass.
Gandalf remained for a while staring after him into the darkness.
‘Good-bye, my dear Bilbo – until our next meeting!’ he said softly
and went back indoors.
Frodo came in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark,
deep in thought. ‘Has he gone?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ answered Gandalf, ‘he has gone at last.’
‘I wish – I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a
joke,’ said Frodo. ‘But I knew in my heart that he really meant to
go. He always used to joke about serious things. I wish I had come
back sooner, just to see him off.’
‘I think really he preferred slipping off quietly in the end,’ said
Gandalf. ‘Don’t be too troubled. He’ll be all right – now. He left a
packet for you. There it is!’
Frodo took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and glanced at it,
but did not open it.
‘You’ll ﬁnd his will and all the other documents in there, I think,’
said the wizard. ‘You are the master of Bag End now. And also, I
fancy, you’ll ﬁnd a golden ring.’
‘The ring!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘Has he left me that? I wonder why.
Still, it may be useful.’
‘It may, and it may not,’ said Gandalf. ‘I should not make use of
it, if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going
to bed.’
As master of Bag End Frodo felt it his painful duty to say good-bye
to the guests. Rumours of strange events had by now spread all over
the ﬁeld, but Frodo would only say no doubt everything will be cleared
up in the morning. About midnight carriages came for the important
folk. One by one they rolled away, ﬁlled with full but very unsatisﬁed
hobbits. Gardeners came by arrangement, and removed in wheelbarrows those that had inadvertently remained behind.
Night slowly passed. The sun rose. The hobbits rose rather later.
Morning went on. People came and began (by orders) to clear away
the pavilions and the tables and the chairs, and the spoons and knives
and bottles and plates, and the lanterns, and the ﬂowering shrubs in
boxes, and the crumbs and cracker-paper, the forgotten bags and
gloves and handkerchiefs, and the uneaten food (a very small item).

A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY

39

‘Only one thing is clear to me,’ said Otho, ‘and that is that you
are doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.’
Otho would have been Bilbo’s heir, but for the adoption of
Frodo. He read the will carefully and snorted. It was, unfortunately,
very clear and correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits,
which demand among other things seven signatures of witnesses in
red ink).
‘Foiled again!’ he said to his wife. ‘And after waiting sixty years.
Spoons? Fiddlesticks!’ He snapped his ﬁngers under Frodo’s nose
and stumped off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little
later Frodo came out of the study to see how things were going on,
and found her still about the place, investigating nooks and corners,
and tapping the ﬂoors. He escorted her ﬁrmly off the premises, after
he had relieved her of several small (but rather valuable) articles that
had somehow fallen inside her umbrella. Her face looked as if she
was in the throes of thinking out a really crushing parting remark;
but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:
‘You’ll live to regret it, young fellow! Why didn’t you go too? You
don’t belong here; you’re no Baggins – you – you’re a Brandybuck!’
‘Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,’ said
Frodo as he shut the door on her.
‘It was a compliment,’ said Merry Brandybuck, ‘and so, of course,
not true.’
Then they went round the hole, and evicted three young hobbits
(two Bofﬁns and a Bolger) who were knocking holes in the walls of
one of the cellars. Frodo also had a tussle with young Sancho
Proudfoot (old Odo Proudfoot’s grandson), who had begun an excavation in the larger pantry, where he thought there was an echo. The
legend of Bilbo’s gold excited both curiosity and hope; for legendary
gold (mysteriously obtained, if not positively ill-gotten), is, as everyone knows, anyone’s for the ﬁnding – unless the search is interrupted.
When he had overcome Sancho and pushed him out, Frodo collapsed on a chair in the hall. ‘It’s time to close the shop, Merry,’ he
said. ‘Lock the door, and don’t open it to anyone today, not even if
they bring a battering ram.’ Then he went to revive himself with a
belated cup of tea.
He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the
front-door. ‘Lobelia again most likely,’ he thought. ‘She must have
thought of something really nasty, and have come back again to say
it. It can wait.’
He went on with his tea. The knock was repeated, much louder,
but he took no notice. Suddenly the wizard’s head appeared at the
window.

40

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘If you don’t let me in, Frodo, I shall blow your door right down
your hole and out through the hill,’ he said.
‘My dear Gandalf ! Half a minute!’ cried Frodo, running out of
the room to the door. ‘Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.’
‘Then I forgive you. But I saw her some time ago, driving a ponytrap towards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk.’
‘She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on
Bilbo’s ring. I longed to disappear.’
‘Don’t do that!’ said Gandalf, sitting down. ‘Do be careful of that
ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a
last word.’
‘Well, what about it?’
‘What do you know already?’
‘Only what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found
it, and how he used it: on his journey, I mean.’
‘Which story, I wonder,’ said Gandalf.
‘Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,’ said Frodo.
‘He told me the true story soon after I came to live here. He said
you had pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. ‘‘No
secrets between us, Frodo,’’ he said; ‘‘but they are not to go any
further. It’s mine anyway.’’ ’
‘That’s interesting,’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, what did you think of it
all?’
‘If you mean, inventing all that about a ‘‘present’’, well, I thought
the true story much more likely, and I couldn’t see the point of
altering it at all. It was very unlike Bilbo to do so, anyway; and I
thought it rather odd.’
‘So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such
treasures – if they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very
careful with it. It may have other powers than just making you vanish
when you wish to.’
‘I don’t understand,’ said Frodo.
‘Neither do I,’ answered the wizard. ‘I have merely begun to
wonder about the ring, especially since last night. No need to worry.
But if you take my advice you will use it very seldom, or not at all.
At least I beg you not to use it in any way that will cause talk or
rouse suspicion. I say again: keep it safe, and keep it secret!’
‘You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of ?’
‘I am not certain, so I will say no more. I may be able to tell you
something when I come back. I am going off at once: so this is
good-bye for the present.’ He got up.
‘At once!’ cried Frodo. ‘Why, I thought you were staying on for
at least a week. I was looking forward to your help.’
‘I did mean to – but I have had to change my mind. I may be

A LONG-EXPECTED PARTY

41

away for a good while; but I’ll come and see you again, as soon as I
can. Expect me when you see me! I shall slip in quietly. I shan’t often
be visiting the Shire openly again. I ﬁnd that I have become rather
unpopular. They say I am a nuisance and a disturber of the peace.
Some people are actually accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or
worse. If you want to know, there is supposed to be a plot between
you and me to get hold of his wealth.’
‘Some people!’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘You mean Otho and Lobelia.
How abominable! I would give them Bag End and everything else,
if I could get Bilbo back and go off tramping in the country with
him. I love the Shire. But I begin to wish, somehow, that I had gone
too. I wonder if I shall ever see him again.’
‘So do I,’ said Gandalf. ‘And I wonder many other things. Goodbye now! Take care of yourself ! Look out for me, especially at unlikely
times! Good-bye!’
Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a ﬁnal wave of his hand, and
walked off at a surprising pace; but Frodo thought the old wizard
looked unusually bent, almost as if he was carrying a great weight.
The evening was closing in, and his cloaked ﬁgure quickly vanished
into the twilight. Frodo did not see him again for a long time.

Chapter 2
THE SHADOW OF THE PAST
The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety-nine days. The
second disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all over the Shire, for a year and a day, and was
remembered much longer than that. It became a ﬁreside-story for
young hobbits; and eventually Mad Baggins, who used to vanish with
a bang and a ﬂash and reappear with bags of jewels and gold, became
a favourite character of legend and lived on long after all the true
events were forgotten.
But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood
was that Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked, had at last gone
quite mad, and had run off into the Blue. There he had undoubtedly
fallen into a pool or a river and come to a tragic, but hardly an
untimely, end. The blame was mostly laid on Gandalf.
‘If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone, perhaps
he’ll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense,’ they said. And to all
appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down,
but the growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he
at once began to carry on Bilbo’s reputation for oddity. He refused
to go into mourning; and the next year he gave a party in honour of
Bilbo’s hundred-and-twelfth birthday, which he called a Hundredweight Feast. But that was short of the mark, for twenty guests were
invited and there were several meals at which it snowed food and
rained drink, as hobbits say.
Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom
of giving Bilbo’s Birthday Party year after year until they got used to
it. He said that he did not think Bilbo was dead. When they asked:
‘Where is he then?’ he shrugged his shoulders.
He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good many
friends, especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descendants of the Old Took) who had as children been fond of Bilbo and
often in and out of Bag End. Folco Bofﬁn and Fredegar Bolger
were two of these; but his closest friends were Peregrin Took
(usually called Pippin), and Merry Brandybuck (his real name was
Meriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping
over the Shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself,
and to the amazement of sensible folk he was sometimes seen far
from home walking in the hills and woods under the starlight. Merry

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

43

and Pippin suspected that he visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had
done.
As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed
signs of good ‘preservation’: outwardly he retained the appearance
of a robust and energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. ‘Some folk
have all the luck,’ they said; but it was not until Frodo approached
the usually more sober age of ﬁfty that they began to think it queer.
Frodo himself, after the ﬁrst shock, found that being his own
master and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant. For
some years he was quite happy and did not worry much about the
future. But half unknown to himself the regret that he had not gone
with Bilbo was steadily growing. He found himself wondering at
times, especially in the autumn, about the wild lands, and strange
visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his dreams.
He began to say to himself: ‘Perhaps I shall cross the River myself one
day.’ To which the other half of his mind always replied: ‘Not yet.’
So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his ﬁftieth
birthday was drawing near: ﬁfty was a number that he felt was somehow signiﬁcant (or ominous); it was at any rate at that age that
adventure had suddenly befallen Bilbo. Frodo began to feel restless,
and the old paths seemed too well-trodden. He looked at maps, and
wondered what lay beyond their edges: maps made in the Shire
showed mostly white spaces beyond its borders. He took to wandering
further aﬁeld and more often by himself; and Merry and his other
friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking and talking
with the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in the
Shire.
There were rumours of strange things happening in the world
outside; and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any
message for several years, Frodo gathered all the news he could.
Elves, who seldom walked in the Shire, could now be seen passing
westward through the woods in the evening, passing and not
returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and were no longer
concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the
road in unusual numbers. The ancient East–West Road ran through
the Shire to its end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always
used it on their way to their mines in the Blue Mountains. They were
the hobbits’ chief source of news from distant parts – if they wanted
any: as a rule dwarves said little and hobbits asked no more. But now
Frodo often met strange dwarves of far countries, seeking refuge in
the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in whispers of the
Enemy and of the Land of Mordor.

44

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark past, like
a shadow in the background of their memories; but it was ominous
and disquieting. It seemed that the evil power in Mirkwood had been
driven out by the White Council only to reappear in greater strength
in the old strongholds of Mordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt,
it was said. From there the power was spreading far and wide, and
away far east and south there were wars and growing fear. Orcs were
multiplying again in the mountains. Trolls were abroad, no longer
dull-witted, but cunning and armed with dreadful weapons. And
there were murmured hints of creatures more terrible than all these,
but they had no name.
Little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary hobbits.
But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began to hear queer
tales; and those whose business took them to the borders saw strange
things. The conversation in The Green Dragon at Bywater, one evening
in the spring of Frodo’s ﬁftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits
still laughed at them.
Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the ﬁre, and opposite
him was Ted Sandyman, the miller’s son; and there were various
other rustic hobbits listening to their talk.
‘Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,’ said Sam.
‘Ah,’ said Ted, ‘you do, if you listen. But I can hear ﬁreside-tales
and children’s stories at home, if I want to.’
‘No doubt you can,’ retorted Sam, ‘and I daresay there’s more
truth in some of them than you reckon. Who invented the stories
anyway? Take dragons now.’
‘No thank ’ee,’ said Ted, ‘I won’t. I heard tell of them when I was a
youngster, but there’s no call to believe in them now. There’s only one
Dragon in Bywater, and that’s Green,’ he said, getting a general laugh.
‘All right,’ said Sam, laughing with the rest. ‘But what about these
Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? They do say that
one bigger than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors
not long back.’
‘Who’s they?’
‘My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Bofﬁn at Overhill and
goes up to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He saw one.’
‘Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal’s always saying he’s seen things;
and maybe he sees things that ain’t there.’
‘But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking – walking
seven yards to a stride, if it was an inch.’
‘Then I bet it wasn’t an inch. What he saw was an elm tree, as
like as not.’

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

45

‘But this one was walking, I tell you; and there ain’t no elm tree
on the North Moors.’
‘Then Hal can’t have seen one,’ said Ted. There was some laughing and clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored
a point.
‘All the same,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t deny that others besides our
Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire – crossing it, mind
you: there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders
have never been so busy before.
‘And I’ve heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do say they
are going to the harbours, out away beyond the White Towers.’ Sam
waved his arm vaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it
was to the Sea, past the old towers beyond the western borders of
the Shire. But it was an old tradition that away over there stood the
Grey Havens, from which at times elven-ships set sail, never to return.
‘They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are going into
the West and leaving us,’ said Sam, half chanting the words, shaking
his head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed.
‘Well, that isn’t anything new, if you believe the old tales. And I
don’t see what it matters to me or you. Let them sail! But I warrant
you haven’t seen them doing it; nor anyone else in the Shire.’
‘Well, I don’t know,’ said Sam thoughtfully. He believed he had
once seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see more one day.
Of all the legends that he had heard in his early years such fragments
of tales and half-remembered stories about the Elves as the hobbits
knew, had always moved him most deeply. ‘There are some, even in
these parts, as know the Fair Folk and get news of them,’ he said.
‘There’s Mr. Baggins now, that I work for. He told me that they
were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves. And old Mr. Bilbo knew
more: many’s the talk I had with him when I was a little lad.’
‘Oh, they’re both cracked,’ said Ted. ‘Leastways old Bilbo was
cracked, and Frodo’s cracking. If that’s where you get your news
from, you’ll never want for moonshine. Well, friends, I’m off home.
Your good health!’ He drained his mug and went out noisily.
Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think
about. For one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden,
and he would have a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The
grass was growing fast. But Sam had more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up and went out.
It was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy rain.
The sun was down, and a cool pale evening was quietly fading into
night. He walked home under the early stars through Hobbiton and
up the Hill, whistling softly and thoughtfully.
*
*
*

46

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away. Then he
paid Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he went
off again. During the next year or two he had turned up fairly often,
coming unexpectedly after dusk, and going off without warning
before sunrise. He would not discuss his own business and journeys,
and seemed chieﬂy interested in small news about Frodo’s health
and doings.
Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since
Frodo had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the
wizard would never return and had given up all interest in hobbits.
But that evening, as Sam was walking home and twilight was fading,
there came the once familiar tap on the study window.
Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight.
They looked hard at one another.
‘All well eh?’ said Gandalf. ‘You look the same as ever, Frodo!’
‘So do you,’ Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf
looked older and more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself
and of the wide world, and soon they were deep in talk, and they
stayed up far into the night.
Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with
Frodo by the open window of the study. A bright ﬁre was on the
hearth, but the sun was warm, and the wind was in the South. Everything looked fresh, and the new green of spring was shimmering in
the ﬁelds and on the tips of the trees’ ﬁngers.
Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years before, when
Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a handkerchief. His hair was
perhaps whiter than it had been then, and his beard and eyebrows
were perhaps longer, and his face more lined with care and wisdom;
but his eyes were as bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smokerings with the same vigour and delight.
He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, deep
in thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of
the tidings that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence.
‘Last night you began to tell me strange things about my ring,
Gandalf,’ he said. ‘And then you stopped, because you said that such
matters were best left until daylight. Don’t you think you had better
ﬁnish now? You say the ring is dangerous, far more dangerous than
I guess. In what way?’
‘In many ways,’ answered the wizard. ‘It is far more powerful than
I ever dared to think at ﬁrst, so powerful that in the end it would
utterly overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would
possess him.

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

47

‘In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic rings as
you call them, and they were, of course, of various kinds: some more
potent and some less. The lesser rings were only essays in the craft
before it was full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but triﬂes
– yet still to my mind dangerous for mortals. But the Great Rings,
the Rings of Power, they were perilous.
‘A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does not
die, but he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues,
until at last every minute is a weariness. And if he often uses the
Ring to make himself invisible, he fades: he becomes in the end
invisible permanently, and walks in the twilight under the eye of the
Dark Power that rules the Rings. Yes, sooner or later – later, if he is
strong or well-meaning to begin with, but neither strength nor good
purpose will last – sooner or later the Dark Power will devour him.’
‘How terrifying!’ said Frodo. There was another long silence. The
sound of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden.
‘How long have you known this?’ asked Frodo at length. ‘And
how much did Bilbo know?’
‘Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,’ said Gandalf.
‘He would certainly never have passed on to you anything that he
thought would be a danger, even though I promised to look after
you. He thought the ring was very beautiful, and very useful at need;
and if anything was wrong or queer, it was himself. He said that it
was ‘‘growing on his mind’’, and he was always worrying about it;
but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to blame. Though he
had found out that the thing needed looking after; it did not seem
always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded in an odd
way, and might suddenly slip off a ﬁnger where it had been tight.’
‘Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,’ said Frodo, ‘so I
have always kept it on its chain.’
‘Very wise,’ said Gandalf. ‘But as for his long life, Bilbo never connected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit for that to himself,
and he was very proud of it. Though he was getting restless and uneasy.
Thin and stretched he said. A sign that the ring was getting control.’
‘How long have you known all this?’ asked Frodo again.
‘Known?’ said Gandalf. ‘I have known much that only the Wise
know, Frodo. But if you mean ‘‘known about this ring’’, well, I still
do not know, one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no
longer doubt my guess.
‘When did I ﬁrst begin to guess?’ he mused, searching back in
memory. ‘Let me see – it was in the year that the White Council
drove the Dark Power from Mirkwood, just before the Battle of Five
Armies, that Bilbo found his ring. A shadow fell on my heart then,

48

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

though I did not know yet what I feared. I wondered often how
Gollum came by a Great Ring, as plainly it was – that at least was
clear from the ﬁrst. Then I heard Bilbo’s strange story of how he had
‘‘won’’ it, and I could not believe it. When I at last got the truth out
of him, I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to the
ring beyond doubt. Much like Gollum with his ‘‘birthday-present’’.
The lies were too much alike for my comfort. Clearly the ring had
an unwholesome power that set to work on its keeper at once. That
was the ﬁrst real warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo
often that such rings were better left unused; but he resented it, and
soon got angry. There was little else that I could do. I could not take
it from him without doing greater harm; and I had no right to do so
anyway. I could only watch and wait. I might perhaps have consulted
Saruman the White, but something always held me back.’
‘Who is he?’ asked Frodo. ‘I have never heard of him before.’
‘Maybe not,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Hobbits are, or were, no concern
of his. Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the chief of my order
and the head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride
has grown with it, and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the
Elven-rings, great and small, is his province. He has long studied it,
seeking the lost secrets of their making; but when the Rings were
debated in the Council, all that he would reveal to us of his ring-lore
told against my fears. So my doubt slept – but uneasily. Still I watched
and I waited.
‘And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed. Yes, they
passed, and they seemed not to touch him. He showed no signs of
age. The shadow fell on me again. But I said to myself: ‘‘After all he
comes of a long-lived family on his mother’s side. There is time yet.
Wait!’’
‘And I waited. Until that night when he left this house. He said
and did things then that ﬁlled me with a fear that no words of
Saruman could allay. I knew at last that something dark and deadly
was at work. And I have spent most of the years since then in ﬁnding
out the truth of it.’
‘There wasn’t any permanent harm done, was there?’ asked Frodo
anxiously. ‘He would get all right in time, wouldn’t he? Be able to
rest in peace, I mean?’
‘He felt better at once,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is only one Power
in this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as
far as I know there is no Power in the world that knows all about
hobbits. Among the Wise I am the only one that goes in for hobbitlore: an obscure branch of knowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as
butter they can be, and yet sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I
think it likely that some would resist the Rings far longer than most

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

49

of the Wise would believe. I don’t think you need worry about Bilbo.
‘Of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used it, so
it might take a long while for the inﬂuence to wear off – before it
was safe for him to see it again, for instance. Otherwise, he might
live on for years, quite happily: just stop as he was when he parted
with it. For he gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important
point. No, I was not troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he
had let the thing go. It is for you that I feel responsible.
‘Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about you,
and about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits. It would be
a grievous blow to the world, if the Dark Power overcame the Shire;
if all your kind, jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Bofﬁns, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became
enslaved.’
Frodo shuddered. ‘But why should we be?’ he asked. ‘And why
should he want such slaves?’
‘To tell you the truth,’ replied Gandalf, ‘I believe that hitherto –
hitherto, mark you – he has entirely overlooked the existence of
hobbits. You should be thankful. But your safety has passed. He does
not need you – he has many more useful servants – but he won’t
forget you again. And hobbits as miserable slaves would please him
far more than hobbits happy and free. There is such a thing as malice
and revenge.’
‘Revenge?’ said Frodo. ‘Revenge for what? I still don’t understand
what all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring.’
‘It has everything to do with it,’ said Gandalf. ‘You do not know
the real peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I
was last here; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for
a moment.’
Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a
chain that hung from his belt. He unfastened it and handed it slowly
to the wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo
himself was in some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it.
Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid gold.
‘Can you see any markings on it?’ he asked.
‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘There are none. It is quite plain, and it never
shows a scratch or sign of wear.’
‘Well then, look!’ To Frodo’s astonishment and distress the wizard
threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the ﬁre.
Frodo gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him
back.
‘Wait!’ he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a quick look
from under his bristling brows.

50

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got
up, closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains.
The room became dark and silent, though the clack of Sam’s shears,
now nearer to the windows, could still be heard faintly from the
garden. For a moment the wizard stood looking at the ﬁre; then he
stooped and removed the ring to the hearth with the tongs, and at
once picked it up. Frodo gasped.
‘It is quite cool,’ said Gandalf. ‘Take it!’ Frodo received it on his
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than
ever.
‘Hold it up!’ said Gandalf. ‘And look closely!’
As Frodo did so, he now saw ﬁne lines, ﬁner than the ﬁnest penstrokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of ﬁre that
seemed to form the letters of a ﬂowing script. They shone piercingly
bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth.

‘I cannot read the ﬁery letters,’ said Frodo in a quavering voice.
‘No,’ said Gandalf, ‘but I can. The letters are Elvish, of an ancient
mode, but the language is that of Mordor, which I will not utter here.
But this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them.
It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore:
Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.’
He paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: ‘This is the
Master-ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the One Ring

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

51

that he lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of his power. He
greatly desires it – but he must not get it.’
Frodo sat silent and motionless. Fear seemed to stretch out a vast
hand, like a dark cloud rising in the East and looming up to engulf
him. ‘This ring!’ he stammered. ‘How, how on earth did it come to
me?’
‘Ah!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is a very long story. The beginnings lie
back in the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember.
If I were to tell you all that tale, we should still be sitting here when
Spring had passed into Winter.
‘But last night I told you of Sauron the Great, the Dark Lord.
The rumours that you have heard are true: he has indeed arisen again
and left his hold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness
in the Dark Tower of Mordor. That name even you hobbits have
heard of, like a shadow on the borders of old stories. Always after a
defeat and a respite, the Shadow takes another shape and grows
again.’
‘I wish it need not have happened in my time,’ said Frodo.
‘So do I,’ said Gandalf, ‘and so do all who live to see such times.
But that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to
do with the time that is given us. And already, Frodo, our time is
beginning to look black. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong.
His plans are far from ripe, I think, but they are ripening. We shall
be hard put to it. We should be very hard put to it, even if it were
not for this dreadful chance.
‘The Enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge to beat down all resistance, break the last defences, and cover
all the lands in a second darkness. He lacks the One Ring.
‘The Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid from him, and his
hand never touched them or sullied them. Seven the Dwarf-kings
possessed, but three he has recovered, and the others the dragons
have consumed. Nine he gave to Mortal Men, proud and great, and
so ensnared them. Long ago they fell under the dominion of the One,
and they became Ringwraiths, shadows under his great Shadow, his
most terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a year since the Nine
walked abroad. Yet who knows? As the Shadow grows once more,
they too may walk again. But come! We will not speak of such things
even in the morning of the Shire.
‘So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Seven also,
or else they are destroyed. The Three are hidden still. But that no
longer troubles him. He only needs the One; for he made that Ring
himself, it is his, and he let a great part of his own former power pass
into it, so that he could rule all the others. If he recovers it, then he

52

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

will command them all again, wherever they be, even the Three, and
all that has been wrought with them will be laid bare, and he will be
stronger than ever.
‘And this is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the One
had perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been
done. But he knows now that it has not perished, that it has been
found. So he is seeking it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent on
it. It is his great hope and our great fear.’
‘Why, why wasn’t it destroyed?’ cried Frodo. ‘And how did the
Enemy ever come to lose it, if he was so strong, and it was so precious
to him?’ He clutched the Ring in his hand, as if he saw already dark
ﬁngers stretching out to seize it.
‘It was taken from him,’ said Gandalf. ‘The strength of the Elves
to resist him was greater long ago; and not all Men were estranged
from them. The Men of Westernesse came to their aid. That is a
chapter of ancient history which it might be good to recall; for there
was sorrow then too, and gathering dark, but great valour, and great
deeds that were not wholly vain. One day, perhaps, I will tell you all
the tale, or you shall hear it told in full by one who knows it best.
‘But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how
this thing came to you, and that will be tale enough, this is all that
I will say. It was Gil-galad, Elven-king and Elendil of Westernesse
who overthrew Sauron, though they themselves perished in the deed;
and Isildur Elendil’s son cut the Ring from Sauron’s hand and took
it for his own. Then Sauron was vanquished and his spirit ﬂed and
was hidden for long years, until his shadow took shape again in
Mirkwood.
‘But the Ring was lost. It fell into the Great River, Anduin, and
vanished. For Isildur was marching north along the east banks of the
River, and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Orcs of
the Mountains, and almost all his folk were slain. He leaped into the
waters, but the Ring slipped from his ﬁnger as he swam, and then
the Orcs saw him and killed him with arrows.’
Gandalf paused. ‘And there in the dark pools amid the Gladden
Fields,’ he said, ‘the Ring passed out of knowledge and legend; and
even so much of its history is known now only to a few, and the
Council of the Wise could discover no more. But at last I can carry
on the story, I think.
‘Long after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the
Great River on the edge of Wilderland a clever-handed and quietfooted little people. I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to the
fathers of the fathers of the Stoors, for they loved the River, and often
swam in it, or made little boats of reeds. There was among them a

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

53

family of high repute, for it was large and wealthier than most, and
it was ruled by a grandmother of the folk, stern and wise in old lore,
such as they had. The most inquisitive and curious-minded of that
family was called Sméagol. He was interested in roots and beginnings;
he dived into deep pools; he burrowed under trees and growing
plants; he tunnelled into green mounds; and he ceased to look up at
the hill-tops, or the leaves on trees, or the ﬂowers opening in the air:
his head and his eyes were downward.
‘He had a friend called Déagol, of similar sort, sharper-eyed but
not so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down
to the Gladden Fields, where there were great beds of iris and ﬂowering reeds. There Sméagol got out and went nosing about the banks
but Déagol sat in the boat and ﬁshed. Suddenly a great ﬁsh took his
hook, and before he knew where he was, he was dragged out and
down into the water, to the bottom. Then he let go of his line, for
he thought he saw something shining in the river-bed; and holding
his breath he grabbed at it.
‘Then up he came spluttering, with weeds in his hair and a handful
of mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! when he washed the
mud away, there in his hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it shone
and glittered in the sun, so that his heart was glad. But Sméagol had
been watching him from behind a tree, and as Déagol gloated over
the ring, Sméagol came softly up behind.
‘ ‘‘Give us that, Déagol, my love,’’ said Sméagol, over his friend’s
shoulder.
‘ ‘‘Why?’’ said Déagol.
‘ ‘‘Because it’s my birthday, my love, and I wants it,’’ said Sméagol.
‘ ‘‘I don’t care,’’ said Déagol. ‘‘I have given you a present already,
more than I could afford. I found this, and I’m going to keep it.’’
‘ ‘‘Oh, are you indeed, my love,’’ said Sméagol; and he caught
Déagol by the throat and strangled him, because the gold looked so
bright and beautiful. Then he put the ring on his ﬁnger.
‘No one ever found out what had become of Déagol; he was
murdered far from home, and his body was cunningly hidden. But
Sméagol returned alone; and he found that none of his family could
see him, when he was wearing the ring. He was very pleased with
his discovery and he concealed it; and he used it to ﬁnd out secrets,
and he put his knowledge to crooked and malicious uses. He became
sharp-eyed and keen-eared for all that was hurtful. The ring had
given him power according to his stature. It is not to be wondered
at that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when visible)
by all his relations. They kicked him, and he bit their feet. He took
to thieving, and going about muttering to himself, and gurgling in
his throat. So they called him Gollum, and cursed him, and told him

54

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

to go far away; and his grandmother, desiring peace, expelled him
from the family and turned him out of her hole.
‘He wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hardness of
the world, and he journeyed up the River, till he came to a stream
that ﬂowed down from the mountains, and he went that way. He
caught ﬁsh in deep pools with invisible ﬁngers and ate them raw.
One day it was very hot, and as he was bending over a pool, he felt
a burning on the back of his head, and a dazzling light from the water
pained his wet eyes. He wondered at it, for he had almost forgotten
about the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and shook his
ﬁst at her.
‘But as he lowered his eyes, he saw far ahead the tops of the Misty
Mountains, out of which the stream came. And he thought suddenly:
‘‘It would be cool and shady under those mountains. The Sun could
not watch me there. The roots of those mountains must be roots
indeed; there must be great secrets buried there which have not been
discovered since the beginning.’’
‘So he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he found a
little cave out of which the dark stream ran; and he wormed his way
like a maggot into the heart of the hills, and vanished out of all
knowledge. The Ring went into the shadows with him, and even the
maker, when his power had begun to grow again, could learn nothing
of it.’
‘Gollum!’ cried Frodo. ‘Gollum? Do you mean that this is the very
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!’
‘I think it is a sad story,’ said the wizard, ‘and it might have
happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.’
‘I can’t believe that Gollum was connected with hobbits, however
distantly,’ said Frodo with some heat. ‘What an abominable notion!’
‘It is true all the same,’ replied Gandalf. ‘About their origins, at
any rate, I know more than hobbits do themselves. And even Bilbo’s
story suggests the kinship. There was a great deal in the background
of their minds and memories that was very similar. They understood
one another remarkably well, very much better than a hobbit would
understand, say, a Dwarf, or an Orc, or even an Elf. Think of the
riddles they both knew, for one thing.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo. ‘Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles,
and of much the same sort. And hobbits don’t cheat. Gollum meant
to cheat all the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo off his
guard. And I daresay it amused his wickedness to start a game which
might end in providing him with an easy victim, but if he lost would
not hurt him.’
‘Only too true, I fear,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there was something

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

55

else in it, I think, which you don’t see yet. Even Gollum was not
wholly ruined. He had proved tougher than even one of the Wise
would have guessed – as a hobbit might. There was a little corner of
his mind that was still his own, and light came through it, as through
a chink in the dark: light out of the past. It was actually pleasant, I
think, to hear a kindly voice again, bringing up memories of wind,
and trees, and sun on the grass, and such forgotten things.
‘But that, of course, would only make the evil part of him angrier
in the end – unless it could be conquered. Unless it could be cured.’
Gandalf sighed. ‘Alas! there is little hope of that for him. Yet not no
hope. No, not though he possessed the Ring so long, almost as far
back as he can remember. For it was long since he had worn it much:
in the black darkness it was seldom needed. Certainly he had never
‘‘faded’’. He is thin and tough still. But the thing was eating up his
mind, of course, and the torment had become almost unbearable.
‘All the ‘‘great secrets’’ under the mountains had turned out to
be just empty night: there was nothing more to ﬁnd out, nothing
worth doing, only nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering.
He was altogether wretched. He hated the dark, and he hated light
more: he hated everything, and the Ring most of all.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo. ‘Surely the Ring was his Precious
and the only thing he cared for? But if he hated it, why didn’t he get
rid of it, or go away and leave it?’
‘You ought to begin to understand, Frodo, after all you have
heard,’ said Gandalf. ‘He hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved
himself. He could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter.
‘A Ring of Power looks after itself, Frodo. It may slip off treacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. At most he plays with the
idea of handing it on to someone else’s care – and that only at an
early stage, when it ﬁrst begins to grip. But as far as I know Bilbo
alone in history has ever gone beyond playing, and really done it. He
needed all my help, too. And even so he would never have just
forsaken it, or cast it aside. It was not Gollum, Frodo, but the Ring
itself that decided things. The Ring left him.’
‘What, just in time to meet Bilbo?’ said Frodo. ‘Wouldn’t an Orc
have suited it better?’
‘It is no laughing matter,’ said Gandalf. ‘Not for you. It was the
strangest event in the whole history of the Ring so far: Bilbo’s arrival
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark.
‘There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The Ring was
trying to get back to its master. It had slipped from Isildur’s hand
and betrayed him; then when a chance came it caught poor Déagol,
and he was murdered; and after that Gollum, and it had devoured
him. It could make no further use of him: he was too small and

56

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never leave his
deep pool again. So now, when its master was awake once more and
sending out his dark thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum.
Only to be picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo
from the Shire!
‘Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design
of the Ring-maker. I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo
was meant to ﬁnd the Ring, and not by its maker. In which case you
also were meant to have it. And that may be an encouraging thought.’
‘It is not,’ said Frodo. ‘Though I am not sure that I understand
you. But how have you learned all this about the Ring, and about
Gollum? Do you really know it all, or are you just guessing still?’
Gandalf looked at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. ‘I knew much and
I have learned much,’ he answered. ‘But I am not going to give an
account of all my doings to you. The history of Elendil and Isildur
and the One Ring is known to all the Wise. Your ring is shown to
be that One Ring by the ﬁre-writing alone, apart from any other
evidence.’
‘And when did you discover that?’ asked Frodo, interrupting.
‘Just now in this room, of course,’ answered the wizard sharply.
‘But I expected to ﬁnd it. I have come back from dark journeys
and long search to make that ﬁnal test. It is the last proof, and all is
now only too clear. Making out Gollum’s part, and ﬁtting it into the
gap in the history, required some thought. I may have started with
guesses about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have
seen him.’
‘You have seen Gollum?’ exclaimed Frodo in amazement.
‘Yes. The obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. I tried long
ago; but I have managed it at last.’
‘Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know
that?’
‘Not so clearly. What I have told you is what Gollum was willing
to tell – though not, of course, in the way I have reported it. Gollum
is a liar, and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the
Ring his ‘‘birthday-present’’, and he stuck to that. He said it came
from his grandmother, who had lots of beautiful things of that kind.
A ridiculous story. I have no doubt that Sméagol’s grandmother was
a matriarch, a great person in her way, but to talk of her possessing
many Elven-rings was absurd, and as for giving them away, it was a
lie. But a lie with a grain of truth.
‘The murder of Déagol haunted Gollum, and he had made up a
defence, repeating it to his ‘‘Precious’’ over and over again, as he
gnawed bones in the dark, until he almost believed it. It was his
birthday. Déagol ought to have given the ring to him. It had obviously

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

57

turned up just so as to be a present. It was his birthday-present, and
so on, and on.
‘I endured him as long as I could, but the truth was desperately
important, and in the end I had to be harsh. I put the fear of ﬁre on
him, and wrung the true story out of him, bit by bit, together with
much snivelling and snarling. He thought he was misunderstood and
ill-used. But when he had at last told me his history, as far as the
end of the Riddle-game and Bilbo’s escape, he would not say any
more, except in dark hints. Some other fear was on him greater than
mine. He muttered that he was going to get his own back. People
would see if he would stand being kicked, and driven into a hole and
then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good friends and very
strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay for it. That was
his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed his name. What is more,
he knew where he came from.’
‘But how did he ﬁnd that out?’ asked Frodo.
‘Well, as for the name, Bilbo very foolishly told Gollum himself;
and after that it would not be difﬁcult to discover his country, once
Gollum came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring
proved stronger than his fear of the Orcs, or even of the light. After
a year or two he left the mountains. You see, though still bound by
desire of it, the Ring was no longer devouring him; he began to revive
a little. He felt old, terribly old, yet less timid, and he was mortally
hungry.
‘Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, and he
always will, I think; but he was cunning. He found he could hide
from daylight and moonshine, and make his way swiftly and softly
by dead of night with his pale cold eyes, and catch small frightened
or unwary things. He grew stronger and bolder with new food and
new air. He found his way into Mirkwood, as one would expect.’
‘Is that where you found him?’ asked Frodo.
‘I saw him there,’ answered Gandalf, ‘but before that he had wandered far, following Bilbo’s trail. It was difﬁcult to learn anything
from him for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted by curses
and threats. ‘‘What had it got in its pocketses?’’ he said. ‘‘It wouldn’t
say, no precious. Little cheat. Not a fair question. It cheated ﬁrst, it
did. It broke the rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious.
And we will, precious!’’
‘That is a sample of his talk. I don’t suppose you want any more.
I had weary days of it. But from hints dropped among the snarls
I gathered that his padding feet had taken him at last to Esgaroth,
and even to the streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well,
the news of the great events went far and wide in Wilderland, and
many had heard Bilbo’s name and knew where he came from. We

58

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

had made no secret of our return journey to his home in the West.
Gollum’s sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.’
‘Then why didn’t he track Bilbo further?’ asked Frodo. ‘Why didn’t
he come to the Shire?’
‘Ah,’ said Gandalf, ‘now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to.
He set out and came back westward, as far as the Great River. But
then he turned aside. He was not daunted by the distance, I am sure.
No, something else drew him away. So my friends think, those that
hunted him for me.
‘The Wood-elves tracked him ﬁrst, an easy task for them, for his
trail was still fresh then. Through Mirkwood and back again it led
them, though they never caught him. The wood was full of the
rumour of him, dreadful tales even among beasts and birds. The
Woodmen said that there was some new terror abroad, a ghost that
drank blood. It climbed trees to ﬁnd nests; it crept into holes to ﬁnd
the young; it slipped through windows to ﬁnd cradles.
‘But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It
wandered off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves’ ken,
and was lost. And then I made a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not
the ﬁrst; though I fear it may prove the worst. I let the matter be. I
let him go; for I had much else to think of at that time, and I still
trusted the lore of Saruman.
‘Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark
and dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again,
after Bilbo left here. And my search would have been in vain, but
for the help that I had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller
and huntsman of this age of the world. Together we sought for
Gollum down the whole length of Wilderland, without hope, and
without success. But at last, when I had given up the chase and
turned to other paths, Gollum was found. My friend returned out of
great perils bringing the miserable creature with him.
‘What he had been doing he would not say. He only wept and
called us cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed
him he whined and cringed, and rubbed his long hands, licking his
ﬁngers as if they pained him, as if he remembered some old torture.
But I am afraid there is no possible doubt: he had made his slow,
sneaking way, step by step, mile by mile, south, down at last to the
Land of Mordor.’
A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heart beating.
Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam’s shears could
now be heard.
‘Yes, to Mordor,’ said Gandalf. ‘Alas! Mordor draws all wicked
things, and the Dark Power was bending all its will to gather them

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

59

there. The Ring of the Enemy would leave its mark, too, leave him
open to the summons. And all folk were whispering then of the new
Shadow in the South, and its hatred of the West. There were his ﬁne
new friends, who would help him in his revenge!
‘Wretched fool! In that land he would learn much, too much for
his comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and pried on the borders
he would be caught, and taken – for examination. That was the way
of it, I fear. When he was found he had already been there long, and
was on his way back. On some errand of mischief. But that does not
matter much now. His worst mischief was done.
‘Yes, alas! through him the Enemy has learned that the One has
been found again. He knows where Isildur fell. He knows where
Gollum found his ring. He knows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave
long life. He knows that it is not one of the Three, for they have
never been lost, and they endure no evil. He knows that it is not one
of the Seven, or the Nine, for they are accounted for. He knows that
it is the One. And he has at last heard, I think, of hobbits and the
Shire.
‘The Shire – he may be seeking for it now, if he has not already
found out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that he may even think
that the long-unnoticed name of Baggins has become important.’
‘But this is terrible!’ cried Frodo. ‘Far worse than the worst that
I imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends,
what am I to do? For now I am really afraid. What am I to do? What
a pity that Bilbo did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!’
‘Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to
strike without need. And he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure
that he took so little hurt from the evil, and escaped in the end,
because he began his ownership of the Ring so. With Pity.’
‘I am sorry,’ said Frodo. ‘But I am frightened; and I do not feel
any pity for Gollum.’
‘You have not seen him,’ Gandalf broke in.
‘No, and I don’t want to,’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t understand you.
Do you mean to say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on
after all those horrible deeds? Now at any rate he is as bad as an Orc,
and just an enemy. He deserves death.’
‘Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And
some that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be
too eager to deal out death in judgement. For even the very wise
cannot see all ends. I have not much hope that Gollum can be cured
before he dies, but there is a chance of it. And he is bound up with
the fate of the Ring. My heart tells me that he has some part to play
yet, for good or ill, before the end; and when that comes, the pity of
Bilbo may rule the fate of many – yours not least. In any case we did

60

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

not kill him: he is very old and very wretched. The Wood-elves have
him in prison, but they treat him with such kindness as they can ﬁnd
in their wise hearts.’
‘All the same,’ said Frodo, ‘even if Bilbo could not kill Gollum, I
wish he had not kept the Ring. I wish he had never found it, and
that I had not got it! Why did you let me keep it? Why didn’t you
make me throw it away, or, or destroy it?’
‘Let you? Make you?’ said the wizard. ‘Haven’t you been listening
to all that I have said? You are not thinking of what you are saying.
But as for throwing it away, that was obviously wrong. These Rings
have a way of being found. In evil hands it might have done great
evil. Worst of all, it might have fallen into the hands of the Enemy.
Indeed it certainly would; for this is the One, and he is exerting all
his power to ﬁnd it or draw it to himself.
‘Of course, my dear Frodo, it was dangerous for you; and that has
troubled me deeply. But there was so much at stake that I had to
take some risk – though even when I was far away there has never
been a day when the Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes.
As long as you never used it, I did not think that the Ring would
have any lasting effect on you, not for evil, not at any rate for a very
long time. And you must remember that nine years ago, when I last
saw you, I still knew little for certain.’
‘But why not destroy it, as you say should have been done long
ago?’ cried Frodo again. ‘If you had warned me, or even sent me a
message, I would have done away with it.’
‘Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?’
‘No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.’
‘Try!’ said Gandalf. ‘Try now!’
Frodo drew the Ring out of his pocket again and looked at it. It
now appeared plain and smooth, without mark or device that he
could see. The gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought
how rich and beautiful was its colour, how perfect was its roundness.
It was an admirable thing and altogether precious. When he took it
out he had intended to ﬂing it from him into the very hottest part of
the ﬁre. But he found now that he could not do so, not without a
great struggle. He weighed the Ring in his hand, hesitating, and
forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told him; and then
with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast it away –
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket.
Gandalf laughed grimly. ‘You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot
easily let it go, nor will to damage it. And I could not ‘‘make’’ you
– except by force, which would break your mind. But as for breaking
the Ring, force is useless. Even if you took it and struck it with a

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

61

heavy sledge-hammer, it would make no dint in it. It cannot be
unmade by your hands, or by mine.
‘Your small ﬁre, of course, would not melt even ordinary gold. This
Ring has already passed through it unscathed, and even unheated. But
there is no smith’s forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not
even the anvils and furnaces of the Dwarves could do that. It has
been said that dragon-ﬁre could melt and consume the Rings of
Power, but there is not now any dragon left on earth in which the
old ﬁre is hot enough; nor was there ever any dragon, not even
Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the One Ring, the
Ruling Ring, for that was made by Sauron himself.
‘There is only one way: to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom in the depths
of Orodruin, the Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you
really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond the grasp of the Enemy for
ever.’
‘I do really wish to destroy it!’ cried Frodo. ‘Or, well, to have it
destroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wish I had never seen
the Ring! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?’
‘Such questions cannot be answered,’ said Gandalf. ‘You may be
sure that it was not for any merit that others do not possess: not for
power or wisdom, at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you
must therefore use such strength and heart and wits as you have.’
‘But I have so little of any of these things! You are wise and
powerful. Will you not take the Ring?’
‘No!’ cried Gandalf, springing to his feet. ‘With that power I should
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring would gain
a power still greater and more deadly.’ His eyes ﬂashed and his face
was lit as by a ﬁre within. ‘Do not tempt me! For I do not wish to
become like the Dark Lord himself. Yet the way of the Ring to my
heart is by pity, pity for weakness and the desire of strength to do
good. Do not tempt me! I dare not take it, not even to keep it safe,
unused. The wish to wield it would be too great for my strength. I
shall have such need of it. Great perils lie before me.’
He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shutters. Sunlight streamed back again into the room. Sam passed along
the path outside whistling. ‘And now,’ said the wizard, turning back
to Frodo, ‘the decision lies with you. But I will always help you.’ He
laid his hand on Frodo’s shoulder. ‘I will help you bear this burden,
as long as it is yours to bear. But we must do something, soon. The
Enemy is moving.’
There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and puffed at
his pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed closed, but under the
lids he was watching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed ﬁxedly at the red

62

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

embers on the hearth, until they ﬁlled all his vision, and he seemed
to be looking down into profound wells of ﬁre. He was thinking of
the fabled Cracks of Doom and the terror of the Fiery Mountain.
‘Well!’ said Gandalf at last. ‘What are you thinking about? Have
you decided what to do?’
‘No!’ answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness,
and ﬁnding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the
window he could see the sunlit garden. ‘Or perhaps, yes. As far as I
understand what you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and
guard it, at least for the present, whatever it may do to me.’
‘Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it
with that purpose,’ said Gandalf.
‘I hope so,’ said Frodo. ‘But I hope that you may ﬁnd some other
better keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it seems that I am a danger,
a danger to all that live near me. I cannot keep the Ring and stay
here. I ought to leave Bag End, leave the Shire, leave everything and
go away.’ He sighed.
‘I should like to save the Shire, if I could – though there have been
times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words,
and have felt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragons might be
good for them. But I don’t feel like that now. I feel that as long as
the Shire lies behind, safe and comfortable, I shall ﬁnd wandering
more bearable: I shall know that somewhere there is a ﬁrm foothold,
even if my feet cannot stand there again.
‘Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo’s or
better, ending in peace. But this would mean exile, a ﬂight from
danger into danger, drawing it after me. And I suppose I must go
alone, if I am to do that and save the Shire. But I feel very small,
and very uprooted, and well – desperate. The Enemy is so strong
and terrible.’
He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to
follow Bilbo ﬂamed up in his heart – to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps
to ﬁnd him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could
almost have run out there and then down the road without his hat,
as Bilbo had done on a similar morning long ago.
‘My dear Frodo!’ exclaimed Gandalf. ‘Hobbits really are amazing
creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to
know about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years
they can still surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such
an answer, not even from you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing
his heir, though he little thought how important it would prove. I
am afraid you are right. The Ring will not be able to stay hidden in
the Shire much longer; and for your own sake, as well as for others,

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

63

you will have to go, and leave the name of Baggins behind you. That
name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or in the Wild. I will
give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr. Underhill.
‘But I don’t think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone
you can trust, and who would be willing to go by your side – and
that you would be willing to take into unknown perils. But if you
look for a companion, be careful in choosing! And be careful of what
you say, even to your closest friends! The enemy has many spies and
many ways of hearing.’
Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all
was very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to one side of the
window. Then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long
arm out and downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam
Gamgee’s curly head hauled by one ear.
‘Well, well, bless my beard!’ said Gandalf. ‘Sam Gamgee is it?
Now what may you be doing?’
‘Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Nothing! Leastways
I was just trimming the grass-border under the window, if you follow
me.’ He picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence.
‘I don’t,’ said Gandalf grimly. ‘It is some time since I last heard
the sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?’
‘Eavesdropping, sir? I don’t follow you, begging your pardon.
There ain’t no eaves at Bag End, and that’s a fact.’
‘Don’t be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you listen?’
Gandalf ’s eyes ﬂashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.
‘Mr. Frodo, sir!’ cried Sam quaking. ‘Don’t let him hurt me, sir!
Don’t let him turn me into anything unnatural! My old dad would
take on so. I meant no harm, on my honour, sir!’
‘He won’t hurt you,’ said Frodo, hardly able to keep from laughing,
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. ‘He knows, as
well as I do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer
his questions straight away!’
‘Well, sir,’ said Sam dithering a little. ‘I heard a deal that I didn’t
rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and Mr. Bilbo, sir,
and dragons, and a ﬁery mountain, and – and Elves, sir. I listened
because I couldn’t help myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless
me, sir, but I do love tales of that sort. And I believe them too,
whatever Ted may say. Elves, sir! I would dearly love to see them.
Couldn’t you take me to see Elves, sir, when you go?’
Suddenly Gandalf laughed. ‘Come inside!’ he shouted, and putting
out both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings
and all, right through the window and stood him on the ﬂoor. ‘Take
you to see Elves, eh?’ he said, eyeing Sam closely, but with a smile
ﬂickering on his face. ‘So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?’

64

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I did, sir. And that’s why I choked: which you heard seemingly.
I tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.’
‘It can’t be helped, Sam,’ said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly
realized that ﬂying from the Shire would mean more painful partings
than merely saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. ‘I
shall have to go. But’ – and here he looked hard at Sam – ‘if you
really care about me, you will keep that dead secret. See? If you don’t,
if you even breathe a word of what you’ve heard here, then I hope
Gandalf will turn you into a spotted toad and ﬁll the garden full of
grass-snakes.’
Sam fell on his knees, trembling. ‘Get up, Sam!’ said Gandalf. ‘I
have thought of something better than that. Something to shut your
mouth, and punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with
Mr. Frodo!’
‘Me, sir!’ cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk.
‘Me go and see Elves and all! Hooray!’ he shouted, and then burst
into tears.

Chapter 3
THREE IS COMPANY
‘You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,’ said Gandalf.
Two or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of
getting ready to go.
‘I know. But it is difﬁcult to do both,’ he objected. ‘If I just vanish
like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.’
‘Of course you mustn’t vanish!’ said Gandalf. ‘That wouldn’t do
at all! I said soon, not instantly. If you can think of any way of slipping
out of the Shire without its being generally known, it will be worth
a little delay. But you must not delay too long.’
‘What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?’ asked Frodo.
‘I think I could probably make some arrangements by then.’
To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had
come to the point: Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than
it had for years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his
last summer in the Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at
least of his heart would think more kindly of journeying, as it always
did at that season. He had indeed privately made up his mind to
leave on his ﬁftieth birthday: Bilbo’s one hundred and twenty-eighth.
It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set out and follow
him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and the one thing
that made the thought of leaving bearable. He thought as little as
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in the end. But
he did not tell all his thoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed
was always difﬁcult to tell.
He looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘Very well,’ he said. ‘I think that
will do – but it must not be any later. I am getting very anxious. In
the meanwhile, do take care, and don’t let out any hint of where you
are going! And see that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I
really shall turn him into a toad.’
‘As for where I am going,’ said Frodo, ‘it would be difﬁcult to give
that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.’
‘Don’t be absurd!’ said Gandalf. ‘I am not warning you against
leaving an address at the post-ofﬁce! But you are leaving the Shire –
and that should not be known, until you are far away. And you must
go, or at least set out, either North, South, West or East – and the
direction should certainly not be known.’
‘I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End, and
of saying farewell, that I have never even considered the direction,’

66

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

said Frodo. ‘For where am I to go? And by what shall I steer? What
is to be my quest? Bilbo went to ﬁnd a treasure, there and back again;
but I go to lose one, and not return, as far as I can see.’
‘But you cannot see very far,’ said Gandalf. ‘Neither can I. It may
be your task to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for
others: I do not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long
road yet.’
‘No indeed!’ said Frodo. ‘But in the meantime what course am I
to take?’
‘Towards danger; but not too rashly, nor too straight,’ answered
the wizard. ‘If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey
should not prove too perilous, though the Road is less easy than it
was, and it will grow worse as the year fails.’
‘Rivendell!’ said Frodo. ‘Very good: I will go east, and I will make
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.’
He spoke lightly; but his heart was moved suddenly with a desire to
see the house of Elrond Halfelven, and breathe the air of that deep
valley where many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace.
One summer’s evening an astonishing piece of news reached the
Ivy Bush and Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders
of the Shire were forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo
was selling Bag End, indeed he had already sold it – to the SackvilleBagginses!
‘For a nice bit, too,’ said some. ‘At a bargain price,’ said others,
‘and that’s more likely when Mistress Lobelia’s the buyer.’ (Otho
had died some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.)
Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even more
debatable than the price. A few held the theory – supported by the
nods and hints of Mr. Baggins himself – that Frodo’s money was
running out: he was going to leave Hobbiton and live in a quiet way
on the proceeds of the sale down in Buckland among his Brandybuck
relations. ‘As far from the Sackville-Bagginses as may be,’ some
added. But so ﬁrmly ﬁxed had the notion of the immeasurable wealth
of the Bagginses of Bag End become that most found this hard to
believe, harder than any other reason or unreason that their fancy
could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yet unrevealed plot
by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go about
by day, it was well known that he was ‘hiding up in the Bag End’.
But however a removal might ﬁt in with the designs of his wizardry,
there was no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to
Buckland.
‘Yes, I shall be moving this autumn,’ he said. ‘Merry Brandybuck
is looking out for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.’

THREE IS COMPANY

67

As a matter of fact with Merry’s help he had already chosen
and bought a little house at Crickhollow in the country beyond
Bucklebury. To all but Sam he pretended he was going to settle down
there permanently. The decision to set out eastwards had suggested
the idea to him; for Buckland was on the eastern borders of the Shire,
and as he had lived there in childhood his going back would at least
seem credible.
Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then one
evening, at the end of June, soon after Frodo’s plan had been ﬁnally
arranged, he suddenly announced that he was going off again next
morning. ‘Only for a short while, I hope,’ he said. ‘But I am going
down beyond the southern borders to get some news, if I can. I have
been idle longer than I should.’
He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather
worried. ‘Has anything happened?’ he asked.
‘Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious
and needs looking into. If I think it necessary after all for you to get
off at once, I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In
the meanwhile stick to your plan; but be more careful than ever,
especially of the Ring. Let me impress on you once more: don’t use
it! ’
He went off at dawn. ‘I may be back any day,’ he said. ‘At the
very latest I shall come back for the farewell party. I think after all
you may need my company on the Road.’
At ﬁrst Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often
what Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasiness wore off, and in
the ﬁne weather he forgot his troubles for a while. The Shire had
seldom seen so fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were
laden with apples, honey was dripping in the combs, and the corn
was tall and full.
Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about
Gandalf again. September was passing and there was still no news
of him. The Birthday, and the removal, drew nearer, and still he did
not come, or send word. Bag End began to be busy. Some of Frodo’s
friends came to stay and help him with the packing: there was
Fredegar Bolger and Folco Bofﬁn, and of course his special friends
Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between them they turned the
whole place upside-down.
On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland,
conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his
new home, by way of the Brandywine Bridge.The next day Frodo
became really anxious, and kept a constant look-out for Gandalf.
Thursday, his birthday morning, dawned as fair and clear as it had

68

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

long ago for Bilbo’s great party. Still Gandalf did not appear. In the
evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, just a dinner
for himself and his four helpers; but he was troubled and felt in no
mood for it. The thought that he would so soon have to part with
his young friends weighed on his heart. He wondered how he would
break it to them.
The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the
party soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf ’s absence. The
dining-room was bare except for a table and chairs, but the food was
good, and there was good wine: Frodo’s wine had not been included
in the sale to the Sackville-Bagginses.
‘Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s get
their claws on it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!’ said
Frodo, as he drained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards.
When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things
they had done together, they toasted Bilbo’s birthday, and they
drank his health and Frodo’s together according to Frodo’s custom.
Then they went out for a sniff of air, and glimpse of the stars, and
then they went to bed. Frodo’s party was over, and Gandalf had not
come.
The next morning they were busy packing another cart with the
remainder of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off
with Fatty (that is Fredegar Bolger). ‘Someone must get there and
warm the house before you arrive,’ said Merry. ‘Well, see you later
– the day after tomorrow, if you don’t go to sleep on the way!’
Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. Frodo
was restless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf.
He decided to wait until nightfall. After that, if Gandalf wanted him
urgently, he would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there ﬁrst.
For Frodo was going on foot. His plan – for pleasure and a last look
at the Shire as much as any other reason – was to walk from Hobbiton
to Bucklebury Ferry, taking it fairly easy.
‘I shall get myself a bit into training, too,’ he said, looking at
himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He had not done
any strenuous walking for a long time, and the reﬂection looked
rather ﬂabby, he thought.
After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired
son, Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo’s annoyance. ‘Ours at last!’
said Lobelia, as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true,
for the sale of Bag End did not take effect until midnight. But Lobelia
can perhaps be forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventyseven years longer for Bag End than she once hoped, and she was
now a hundred years old. Anyway, she had come to see that nothing

THREE IS COMPANY

69

she had paid for had been carried off; and she wanted the keys. It
took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought a complete inventory with her and went right through it. In the end she departed with
Lotho and the spare key and the promise that the other key would
be left at the Gamgees’ in Bagshot Row. She snorted, and showed
plainly that she thought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole
during the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea.
He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen.
It had been ofﬁcially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland
‘to do for Mr. Frodo and look after his bit of garden’; an arrangement
that was approved by the Gaffer, though it did not console him for
the prospect of having Lobelia as a neighbour.
‘Our last meal at Bag End!’ said Frodo, pushing back his chair.
They left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Sam strapped up
their three packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for
a last stroll in the garden. Sam disappeared.
The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled. Frodo wandered round the familiar rooms, and saw the light
of the sunset fade on the walls, and shadows creep out of the corners.
It grew slowly dark indoors. He went out and walked down to the
gate at the bottom of the path, and then on a short way down the
Hill Road. He half expected to see Gandalf come striding up through
the dusk.
The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. ‘It’s going
to be a ﬁne night,’ he said aloud. ‘That’s good for a beginning. I feel
like walking. I can’t bear any more hanging about. I am going to
start, and Gandalf must follow me.’ He turned to go back, and then
stopped, for he heard voices, just round the corner by the end of
Bagshot Row. One voice was certainly the old Gaffer’s; the other was
strange, and somehow unpleasant. He could not make out what it
said, but he heard the Gaffer’s answers, which were rather shrill. The
old man seemed put out.
‘No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam
went with him: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, sold out and gone, I
tell’ee. Why? Why’s none of my business, or yours. Where to? That
ain’t no secret. He’s moved to Bucklebury or some such place, away
down yonder. Yes it is – a tidy way. I’ve never been so far myself;
they’re queer folks in Buckland. No, I can’t give no message. Good
night to you!’
Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why
the fact that they did not come on up the Hill seemed a great relief.
‘I am sick of questions and curiosity about my doings, I suppose,’
he thought. ‘What an inquisitive lot they all are!’ He had half a mind

74

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

springs were at every doorstep, and every path was its tributary. ‘‘It’s
a dangerous business, Frodo, going out of your door,’’ he used to
say. ‘‘You step into the Road, and if you don’t keep your feet, there
is no knowing where you might be swept off to. Do you realize that
this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood, and that if you let
it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain or even further and to
worse places?’’ He used to say that on the path outside the front door
at Bag End, especially after he had been out for a long walk.’
‘Well, the Road won’t sweep me anywhere for an hour at least,’
said Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example,
putting their packs against the bank and their legs out into the road.
After a rest they had a good lunch, and then more rest.
The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon was
on the land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a
soul on the road. This way was not much used, being hardly ﬁt for
carts, and there was little trafﬁc to the Woody End. They had been
jogging along again for an hour or more when Sam stopped a moment
as if listening. They were now on level ground, and the road after
much winding lay straight ahead through grass-land sprinkled with
tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.
‘I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,’ said
Sam.
They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them from
seeing far. ‘I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,’ said Frodo;
but even as he said it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a
sudden desire to hide from the view of the rider came over him.
‘It may not matter much,’ he said apologetically, ‘but I would
rather not be seen on the road – by anyone. I am sick of my doings
being noticed and discussed. And if it is Gandalf,’ he added as an
afterthought, ‘we can give him a little surprise, to pay him out for
being so late. Let’s get out of sight!’
The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow
not far from the road. There they lay ﬂat. Frodo hesitated for a
second: curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire
to hide. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself
down in a patch of long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the
road. Then he lifted his head and peered cautiously above one of the
great roots.
Round the corner came a black horse, no hobbit-pony but a fullsized horse; and on it sat a large man, who seemed to crouch in the
saddle, wrapped in a great black cloak and hood, so that only his
boots in the high stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and
invisible.

THREE IS COMPANY

75

When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped.
The riding ﬁgure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From
inside the hood came a noise as of someone snifﬁng to catch an elusive
scent; the head turned from side to side of the road.
A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo, and
he thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and yet the desire
to get it out of his pocket became so strong that he began slowly to
move his hand. He felt that he had only to slip it on, and then he
would be safe. The advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used
the Ring. ‘And I am still in the Shire,’ he thought, as his hand touched
the chain on which it hung. At that moment the rider sat up, and
shook the reins. The horse stepped forward, walking slowly at ﬁrst,
and then breaking into a quick trot.
Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider, until
he dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it
seemed to him that suddenly, before it passed out of sight, the horse
turned aside and went into the trees on the right.
‘Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,’ said Frodo
to himself, as he walked towards his companions. Pippin and Sam
had remained ﬂat in the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo
described the rider and his strange behaviour.
‘I can’t say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling for
me; and also I felt certain that I did not want him to discover me.
I’ve never seen or felt anything like it in the Shire before.’
‘But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?’ said Pippin.
‘And what is he doing in this part of the world?’
‘There are some Men about,’ said Frodo. ‘Down in the Southfarthing they have had trouble with Big People, I believe. But I have
never heard of anything like this rider. I wonder where he comes
from.’
‘Begging your pardon,’ put in Sam suddenly, ‘I know where he
comes from. It’s from Hobbiton that this here black rider comes,
unless there’s more than one. And I know where he’s going to.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment. ‘Why didn’t you speak up before?’
‘I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back
to our hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me:
Hallo, Sam! he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this
morning. There’s been a strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag
End, and he’s only just gone. I’ve sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I
liked the sound of him. He seemed mighty put out, when I told him Mr.
Baggins had left his old home for good. Hissed at me, he did. It gave me
quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was he? says I to the Gaffer. I
don’t know, says he; but he wasn’t a hobbit. He was tall and black-like,

76

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and he stooped over me. I reckon it was one of the Big Folk from foreign
parts. He spoke funny.
‘I couldn’t stay to hear more, sir, since you were waiting; and I
didn’t give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and
more than a bit blind, and it must have been near dark when this
fellow come up the Hill and found him taking the air at the end of
our Row. I hope he hasn’t done no harm, sir, nor me.’
‘The Gaffer can’t be blamed anyway,’ said Frodo. ‘As a matter of
fact I heard him talking to a stranger, who seemed to be inquiring
for me, and I nearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had,
or you had told me about it before. I might have been more careful
on the road.’
‘Still, there may be no connexion between this rider and the
Gaffer’s stranger,’ said Pippin. ‘We left Hobbiton secretly enough,
and I don’t see how he could have followed us.’
‘What about the smelling, sir?’ said Sam. ‘And the Gaffer said he
was a black chap.’
‘I wish I had waited for Gandalf,’ Frodo muttered. ‘But perhaps
it would only have made matters worse.’
‘Then you know or guess something about this rider?’ said Pippin,
who had caught the muttered words.
‘I don’t know, and I would rather not guess,’ said Frodo.
‘All right, cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the present,
if you want to be mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do?
I should like a bite and a sup, but somehow I think we had better
move on from here. Your talk of snifﬁng riders with invisible noses
has unsettled me.’
‘Yes, I think we will move on now,’ said Frodo; ‘but not on the
road – in case that rider comes back, or another follows him. We
ought to do a good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.’
The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass, as they
started off again. They now kept a stone’s throw to the left of the
road, and kept out of sight of it as much as they could. But this
hindered them; for the grass was thick and tussocky, and the ground
uneven, and the trees began to draw together into thickets.
The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs, and
evening was coming on before they came back to the road at the end
of the long level over which it had run straight for some miles. At
that point it bent left and went down into the lowlands of the Yale
making for Stock; but a lane branched right, winding through a wood
of ancient oak-trees on its way to Woodhall. ‘That is the way for us,’
said Frodo.
Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk of a

THREE IS COMPANY

83

The tidings were mostly sad and ominous: of gathering darkness, the
wars of Men, and the ﬂight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked the
question that was nearest to his heart:
‘Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?’
Gildor smiled. ‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘Twice. He said farewell to us
on this very spot. But I saw him once again, far from here.’ He would
say no more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent.
‘You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,’
said Gildor. ‘But I already know a little, and I can read more in your
face and in the thought behind your questions. You are leaving the
Shire, and yet you doubt that you will ﬁnd what you seek, or accomplish what you intend, or that you will ever return. Is not that so?’
‘It is,’ said Frodo; ‘but I thought my going was a secret known
only to Gandalf and my faithful Sam.’ He looked down at Sam, who
was snoring gently.
‘The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,’ said Gildor.
‘The Enemy?’ said Frodo. ‘Then you know why I am leaving the
Shire?’
‘I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuing you,’
answered Gildor; ‘but I perceive that he is – strange indeed though
that seems to me. And I warn you that peril is now both before you
and behind you, and upon either side.’
‘You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants of the
Enemy. What are the Black Riders?’
‘Has Gandalf told you nothing?’
‘Nothing about such creatures.’
‘Then I think it is not for me to say more – lest terror should keep
you from your journey. For it seems to me that you have set out only
just in time, if indeed you are in time. You must now make haste, and
neither stay nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to
you.’
‘I cannot imagine what information could be more terrifying than
your hints and warnings,’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘I knew that danger lay
ahead, of course; but I did not expect to meet it in our own Shire.
Can’t a hobbit walk from the Water to the River in peace?’
‘But it is not your own Shire,’ said Gildor. ‘Others dwelt here
before hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are
no more. The wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in,
but you cannot for ever fence it out.’
‘I know – and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What
can I do now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly, and make my
way to Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get
to Buckland.’
‘I think you should still follow that plan,’ said Gildor. ‘I do not

84

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

think the Road will prove too hard for your courage. But if you desire
clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I do not know the reason
for your ﬂight, and therefore I do not know by what means your
pursuers will assail you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose
that you will see him before you leave the Shire?’
‘I hope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious. I
have been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come
to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago; but he has never appeared.
Now I am wondering what can have happened. Should I wait for
him?’
Gildor was silent for a moment. ‘I do not like this news,’ he said
at last. ‘That Gandalf should be late, does not bode well. But it is
said: Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and
quick to anger. The choice is yours: to go or wait.’
‘And it is also said,’ answered Frodo: ‘Go not to the Elves for counsel,
for they will say both no and yes.’
‘Is it indeed?’ laughed Gildor. ‘Elves seldom give unguarded
advice, for advice is a dangerous gift, even from the wise to the wise,
and all courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told
me all concerning yourself; and how then shall I choose better than
you? But if you demand advice, I will for friendship’s sake give it. I
think you should now go at once, without delay; and if Gandalf does
not come before you set out, then I also advise this: do not go alone.
Take such friends as are trusty and willing. Now you should be
grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly. The Elves have their
own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little concerned
with the ways of hobbits, or of any other creatures upon earth. Our
paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting there
may be more than chance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I
fear to say too much.’
‘I am deeply grateful,’ said Frodo; ‘but I wish you would tell me
plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice I may not see
Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know what is the danger
that pursues me.’
‘Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the Enemy?’
answered Gildor. ‘Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are
deadly. Ask no more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is
ended, you, Frodo son of Drogo, will know more of these fell things
than Gildor Inglorion. May Elbereth protect you!’
‘But where shall I ﬁnd courage?’ asked Frodo. ‘That is what I
chieﬂy need.’
‘Courage is found in unlikely places,’ said Gildor. ‘Be of good
hope! Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but we will
send our messages through the lands. The Wandering Companies

A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS

87

even if they are willing to come. The inheritance is mine alone. I
don’t think I ought even to take Sam.’ He looked at Sam Gamgee,
and discovered that Sam was watching him.
‘Well, Sam!’ he said. ‘What about it? I am leaving the Shire as
soon as ever I can – in fact I have made up my mind now not even
to wait a day at Crickhollow, if it can be helped.’
‘Very good, sir!’
‘You still mean to come with me?’
‘I do.’
‘It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. It is already dangerous.
Most likely neither of us will come back.’
‘If you don’t come back, sir, then I shan’t, that’s certain,’ said
Sam. ‘Don’t you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never
mean to. I am going with him, if he climbs to the Moon; and if any of
those Black Riders try to stop him, they’ll have Sam Gamgee to reckon
with, I said. They laughed.’
‘Who are they, and what are you talking about?’
‘The Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and they seemed to
know you were going away, so I didn’t see the use of denying it.
Wonderful folk, Elves, sir! Wonderful!’
‘They are,’ said Frodo. ‘Do you like them still, now you have had
a closer view?’
‘They seem a bit above my likes and dislikes, so to speak,’ answered
Sam slowly. ‘It don’t seem to matter what I think about them. They
are quite different from what I expected – so old and young, and so
gay and sad, as it were.’
Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some
outward sign of the odd change that seemed to have come over him.
It did not sound like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought
he knew. But it looked like the old Sam Gamgee sitting there, except
that his face was unusually thoughtful.
‘Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now – now that your wish
to see them has come true already?’ he asked.
‘Yes, sir. I don’t know how to say it, but after last night I feel
different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind of way. I know we are going
to take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can’t turn back.
It isn’t to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I want –
I don’t rightly know what I want: but I have something to do before
the end, and it lies ahead, not in the Shire. I must see it through,
sir, if you understand me.’
‘I don’t altogether. But I understand that Gandalf chose me a
good companion. I am content. We will go together.’
Frodo ﬁnished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up he looked
over the land ahead, and called to Pippin.

A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED

103

‘That was only a guess,’ said Frodo hastily. ‘Maggot does not know
anything.’
‘Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,’ said Merry. ‘A lot goes on behind
his round face that does not come out in his talk. I’ve heard that he
used to go into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation
of knowing a good many strange things. But you can at least tell us,
Frodo, whether you think his guess good or bad.’
‘I think,’ answered Frodo slowly, ‘that it was a good guess, as far
as it goes. There is a connexion with Bilbo’s old adventures, and the
Riders are looking, or perhaps one ought to say searching, for him or
for me. I also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and
that I am not safe here or anywhere else.’ He looked round at the
windows and walls, as if he was afraid they would suddenly give way.
The others looked at him in silence, and exchanged meaning glances
among themselves.
‘It’s coming out in a minute,’ whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry
nodded.
‘Well!’ said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his back, as
if he had made a decision. ‘I can’t keep it dark any longer. I have
got something to tell you all. But I don’t know quite how to begin.’
‘I think I could help you,’ said Merry quietly, ‘by telling you some
of it myself.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo, looking at him anxiously.
‘Just this, my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, because you don’t
know how to say good-bye. You meant to leave the Shire, of course.
But danger has come on you sooner than you expected, and now
you are making up your mind to go at once. And you don’t want to.
We are very sorry for you.’
Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of surprise
was so comical that they laughed. ‘Dear old Frodo!’ said Pippin. ‘Did
you really think you had thrown dust in all our eyes? You have not
been nearly careful or clever enough for that! You have obviously
been planning to go and saying farewell to all your haunts all this
year since April. We have constantly heard you muttering: ‘‘Shall I
ever look down into that valley again, I wonder’’, and things like
that. And pretending that you had come to the end of your money,
and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those SackvilleBagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.’
‘Good heavens!’ said Frodo. ‘I thought I had been both careful
and clever. I don’t know what Gandalf would say. Is all the Shire
discussing my departure then?’
‘Oh no!’ said Merry. ‘Don’t worry about that! The secret won’t
keep for long, of course; but at present it is, I think, only known to
us conspirators. After all, you must remember that we know you well,

A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED

105

‘After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I spied. But
you must admit that it was very intriguing, and I was only in my
teens. I must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that
has ever seen the old fellow’s secret book.’
‘You have read his book!’ cried Frodo. ‘Good heavens above! Is
nothing safe?’
‘Not too safe, I should say,’ said Merry. ‘But I have only had one
rapid glance, and that was difﬁcult to get. He never left the book
about. I wonder what became of it. I should like another look. Have
you got it, Frodo?’
‘No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.’
‘Well, as I was saying,’ Merry proceeded, ‘I kept my knowledge
to myself, till this spring when things got serious. Then we formed
our conspiracy; and as we were serious, too, and meant business, we
have not been too scrupulous. You are not a very easy nut to crack,
and Gandalf is worse. But if you want to be introduced to our chief
investigator, I can produce him.’
‘Where is he?’ said Frodo, looking round, as if he expected a
masked and sinister ﬁgure to come out of a cupboard.
‘Step forward, Sam!’ said Merry; and Sam stood up with a face
scarlet up to the ears. ‘Here’s our collector of information! And he
collected a lot, I can tell you, before he was ﬁnally caught. After
which, I may say, he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and
dried up.’
‘Sam!’ cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further,
and quite unable to decide whether he felt angry, amused, relieved,
or merely foolish.
‘Yes, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant no
wrong to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. He
has some sense, mind you; and when you said go alone, he said no!
take someone as you can trust.’
‘But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,’ said Frodo.
Sam looked at him unhappily. ‘It all depends on what you want,’
put in Merry. ‘You can trust us to stick to you through thick and
thin – to the bitter end. And you can trust us to keep any secret of
yours – closer than you keep it yourself. But you cannot trust us to
let you face trouble alone, and go off without a word. We are your
friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what Gandalf
has told you. We know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly
afraid – but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.’
‘And after all, sir,’ added Sam, ‘you did ought to take the Elves’
advice. Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you
can’t deny it.’
‘I don’t deny it,’ said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now

106

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

grinning. ‘I don’t deny it, but I’ll never believe you are sleeping again,
whether you snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure.
‘You are a set of deceitful scoundrels!’ he said, turning to the
others. ‘But bless you!’ he laughed, getting up and waving his arms,
‘I give in. I will take Gildor’s advice. If the danger were not so dark,
I should dance for joy. Even so, I cannot help feeling happy; happier
than I have felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.’
‘Good! That’s settled. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and company!’ they shouted; and they danced round him. Merry and Pippin
began a song, which they had apparently got ready for the occasion.
It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo on
his adventure long ago, and went to the same tune:
Farewell we call to hearth and hall!
Though wind may blow and rain may fall,
We must away ere break of day
Far over wood and mountain tall.
To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell
In glades beneath the misty fell,
Through moor and waste we ride in haste,
And whither then we cannot tell.
With foes ahead, behind us dread,
Beneath the sky shall be our bed,
Until at last our toil be passed,
Our journey done, our errand sped.
We must away! We must away!
We ride before the break of day!
‘Very good!’ said Frodo. ‘But in that case there are a lot of things
to do before we go to bed – under a roof, for tonight at any rate.’
‘Oh! That was poetry!’ said Pippin. ‘Do you really mean to start
before the break of day?’
‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I fear those Black Riders, and
I am sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in a place
to which it is known I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to
wait. But I should very much like to see Gandalf. I could see that
even Gildor was disturbed when he heard that Gandalf had never
appeared. It really depends on two things. How soon could the Riders
get to Bucklebury? And how soon could we get off ? It will take a
good deal of preparation.’
‘The answer to the second question,’ said Merry, ‘is that we could

A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED

107

get off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are
ﬁve ponies in a stable across the ﬁelds; stores and tackle are all
packed, except for a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.’
‘It seems to have been a very efﬁcient conspiracy,’ said Frodo.
‘But what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day
for Gandalf ?’
‘That all depends on what you think the Riders would do, if they
found you here,’ answered Merry. ‘They could have reached here by
now, of course, if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where
the Hedge runs down to the river-bank, just this side of the Bridge.
The gate-guards would not let them through by night, though they
might break through. Even in the daylight they would try to keep
them out, I think, at any rate until they got a message through to
the Master of the Hall – for they would not like the look of the Riders,
and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland
cannot resist a determined attack for long. And it is possible that in
the morning even a Black Rider that rode up and asked for Mr.
Baggins would be let through. It is pretty generally known that you
are coming back to live at Crickhollow.’
Frodo sat for a while in thought. ‘I have made up my mind,’ he
said ﬁnally. ‘I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am
not going by road: it would be safer to wait here than that. If I go
through the North-gate my departure from Buckland will be known
at once, instead of being secret for several days at least, as it might be.
And what is more, the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will
certainly be watched, whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not. We
don’t know how many there are; but there are at least two, and possibly
more. The only thing to do is to go off in a quite unexpected direction.’
‘But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!’ said Fredegar
horriﬁed. ‘You can’t be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous
as Black Riders.’
‘Not quite,’ said Merry. ‘It sounds very desperate, but I believe
Frodo is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed
at once. With luck we might get a considerable start.’
‘But you won’t have any luck in the Old Forest,’ objected Fredegar.
‘No one ever has luck in there. You’ll get lost. People don’t go in there.’
‘Oh yes they do!’ said Merry. ‘The Brandybucks go in – occasionally when the ﬁt takes them. We have a private entrance. Frodo went
in once, long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight,
of course, when the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.’
‘Well, do as you think best!’ said Fredegar. ‘I am more afraid of
the Old Forest than of anything I know about: the stories about it
are a nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, as I am not going on

108

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the journey. Still, I am very glad someone is stopping behind, who
can tell Gandalf what you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure
he will before long.’
Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave
the Shire, nor to see what lay outside it. His family came from the
Eastfarthing, from Budgeford in Bridgeﬁelds in fact, but he had never
been over the Brandywine Bridge. His task, according to the original
plans of the conspirators, was to stay behind and deal with inquisitive
folk, and to keep up as long as possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins
was still living at Crickhollow. He had even brought along some old
clothes of Frodo’s to help him in playing the part. They little thought
how dangerous that part might prove.
‘Excellent!’ said Frodo, when he understood the plan. ‘We could
not have left any message behind for Gandalf otherwise. I don’t know
whether these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not
have dared to risk a written message, in case they got in and searched
the house. But if Fatty is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure
of Gandalf knowing the way we have gone, that decides me. I am
going into the Old Forest ﬁrst thing tomorrow.’
‘Well, that’s that,’ said Pippin. ‘On the whole I would rather have
our job than Fatty’s – waiting here till Black Riders come.’
‘You wait till you are well inside the Forest,’ said Fredegar. ‘You’ll
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.’
‘It’s no good arguing about it any more,’ said Merry. ‘We have
still got to tidy up and put the ﬁnishing touches to the packing, before
we get to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.’
When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for some
time. His legs ached. He was glad that he was riding in the morning.
Eventually he fell into a vague dream, in which he seemed to be
looking out of a high window over a dark sea of tangled trees. Down
below among the roots there was the sound of creatures crawling
and snufﬂing. He felt sure they would smell him out sooner or later.
Then he heard a noise in the distance. At ﬁrst he thought it was
a great wind coming over the leaves of the forest. Then he knew that
it was not leaves, but the sound of the Sea far-off; a sound he had
never heard in waking life, though it had often troubled his dreams.
Suddenly he found he was out in the open. There were no trees after
all. He was on a dark heath, and there was a strange salt smell in the
air. Looking up he saw before him a tall white tower, standing alone
on a high ridge. A great desire came over him to climb the tower
and see the Sea. He started to struggle up the ridge towards the
tower: but suddenly a light came in the sky, and there was a noise
of thunder.

Chapter 6
THE OLD FOREST
Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry was standing there with a candle in one hand, and banging on the door with the
other. ‘All right! What is it?’ said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered.
‘What is it!’ cried Merry. ‘It is time to get up. It is half past four
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready.
Even Pippin is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch
the one that is to be the baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty!
At least he must get up and see us off.’
Soon after six o’clock the ﬁve hobbits were ready to start. Fatty
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry
went in front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path
that went through a spinney behind the house, and then cut across
several ﬁelds. The leaves of trees were glistening, and every twig was
dripping; the grass was grey with cold dew. Everything was still, and
far-away noises seemed near and clear: fowls chattering in a yard,
someone closing a door of a distant house.
In their shed they found the ponies: sturdy little beasts of the kind
loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a long day’s work. They
mounted, and soon they were riding off into the mist, which seemed
to open reluctantly before them and close forbiddingly behind them.
After riding for about an hour, slowly and without talking, they saw
the Hedge looming suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over with
silver cobwebs.
‘How are you going to get through this?’ asked Fredegar.
‘Follow me!’ said Merry, ‘and you will see.’ He turned to the left
along the Hedge, and soon they came to a point where it bent inwards,
running along the lip of a hollow. A cutting had been made, at some
distance from the Hedge, and went sloping gently down into the
ground. It had walls of brick at the sides, which rose steadily, until
suddenly they arched over and formed a tunnel that dived deep under
the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side.
Here Fatty Bolger halted. ‘Good-bye, Frodo!’ he said. ‘I wish you
were not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the day is out. But good luck to you – today and every
day!’
‘If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be
lucky,’ said Frodo. ‘Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we
shall soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.’ ‘Good-bye!’

132

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

odd the caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they seemed to weave
a single dance, neither hindering the other, in and out of the room,
and round about the table; and with great speed food and vessels and
lights were set in order. The boards blazed with candles, white and
yellow. Tom bowed to his guests. ‘Supper is ready,’ said Goldberry;
and now the hobbits saw that she was clothed all in silver with a
white girdle, and her shoes were like ﬁshes’ mail. But Tom was all
in clean blue, blue as rain-washed forget-me-nots, and he had green
stockings.
It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the
spell of Tom’s words may have missed one meal or many, but when
the food was before them it seemed at least a week since they had
eaten. They did not sing or even speak much for a while, and paid
close attention to business. But after a time their hearts and spirits
rose high again, and their voices rang out in mirth and laughter.
After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, songs
that began merrily in the hills and fell softly down into silence; and
in the silences they saw in their minds pools and waters wider than
any they had known, and looking into them they saw the sky below
them and the stars like jewels in the depths. Then once more she
wished them each good night and left them by the ﬁreside. But Tom
now seemed wide awake and plied them with questions.
He appeared already to know much about them and all their
families, and indeed to know much of all the history and doings of
the Shire down from days hardly remembered among the hobbits
themselves. It no longer surprised them; but he made no secret that
he owed his recent knowledge largely to Farmer Maggot, whom he
seemed to regard as a person of more importance than they had
imagined. ‘There’s earth under his old feet, and clay on his ﬁngers;
wisdom in his bones, and both his eyes are open,’ said Tom. It was
also clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that
in some fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the
ﬂight of Frodo.
Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, that Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his
own hopes and fears than he had told before even to Gandalf. Tom
wagged his head up and down, and there was a glint in his eyes when
he heard of the Riders.
‘Show me the precious Ring!’ he said suddenly in the midst of the
story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out the chain from
his pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom.
It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big brownskinned hand. Then suddenly he put it to his eye and laughed. For

IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL

133

a second the hobbits had a vision, both comical and alarming, of his
bright blue eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the
Ring round the end of his little ﬁnger and held it up to the candlelight.
For a moment the hobbits noticed nothing strange about this. Then
they gasped. There was no sign of Tom disappearing!
Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air – and
it vanished with a ﬂash. Frodo gave a cry – and Tom leaned forward
and handed it back to him with a smile.
Frodo looked at it closely, and rather suspiciously (like one who
has lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked the
same and weighed the same: for that Ring had always seemed to
Frodo to weigh strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted
him to make sure. He was perhaps a triﬂe annoyed with Tom for
seeming to make so light of what even Gandalf thought so perilously
important. He waited for an opportunity, when the talk was going
again, and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers and their
queer ways – then he slipped the Ring on.
Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and
checked an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in a way): it was his
own ring all right, for Merry was staring blankly at his chair, and
obviously could not see him. He got up and crept quietly away from
the ﬁreside towards the outer door.
‘Hey there!’ cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing
look in his shining eyes. ‘Hey! Come Frodo, there! Where be you
a-going? Old Tom Bombadil’s not as blind as that yet. Take off your
golden ring! Your hand’s more fair without it. Come back! Leave
your game and sit down beside me! We must talk a while more, and
think about the morning. Tom must teach the right road, and keep
your feet from wandering.’
Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he
came and sat down again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the
Sun would shine tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and
setting out would be hopeful. But they would do well to start early;
for weather in that country was a thing that even Tom could not be
sure of for long, and it would change sometimes quicker than he
could change his jacket. ‘I am no weather-master,’ said he; ‘nor is
aught that goes on two legs.’
By his advice they decided to make nearly due North from his
house, over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might
hope in that way to strike the East Road in a day’s journey, and avoid
the Barrows. He told them not to be afraid – but to mind their own
business.
‘Keep to the green grass. Don’t you go a-meddling with old stone
or cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk

140

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Here!’ said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come out of
the ground. ‘I am waiting for you!’
‘No!’ said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, and
he fell on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound.
Trembling he looked up, in time to see a tall dark ﬁgure like a shadow
against the stars. It leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes,
very cold though lit with a pale light that seemed to come from some
remote distance. Then a grip stronger and colder than iron seized
him. The icy touch froze his bones, and he remembered no more.
When he came to himself again, for a moment he could recall
nothing except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he knew that he was
imprisoned, caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A Barrow-wight
had taken him, and he was probably already under the dreadful spells
of the Barrow-wights about which whispered tales spoke. He dared
not move, but lay as he found himself: ﬂat on his back upon a cold
stone with his hands on his breast.
But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the
very darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking
about Bilbo Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together
in the lanes of the Shire and talking about roads and adventures.
There is a seed of courage hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the
heart of the fattest and most timid hobbit, waiting for some ﬁnal and
desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo was neither very fat nor
very timid; indeed, though he did not know it, Bilbo (and Gandalf )
had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought he had
come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought
hardened him. He found himself stiffening, as if for a ﬁnal spring;
he no longer felt limp like a helpless prey.
As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed
all at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish
light was growing round him. It did not at ﬁrst show him what kind
of a place he was in, for the light seemed to be coming out of himself,
and from the ﬂoor beside him, and had not yet reached the roof or
wall. He turned, and there in the cold glow he saw lying beside him
Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were on their backs, and their faces
looked deathly pale; and they were clad in white. About them lay
many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light they looked cold
and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chains were about
their waists, and on their ﬁngers were many rings. Swords lay by
their sides, and shields were at their feet. But across their three necks
lay one long naked sword.
*
*
*

FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS

141

Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling. The
voice seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in
the air and thin, sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out
of the formless stream of sad but horrible sounds, strings of words
would now and again shape themselves: grim, hard, cold words,
heartless and miserable. The night was railing against the morning
of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the warmth for
which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while
the song became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived
that it had changed into an incantation:
Cold be hand and heart and bone,
and cold be sleep under stone:
never more to wake on stony bed,
never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead.
In the black wind the stars shall die,
and still on gold here let them lie,
till the dark lord lifts his hand
over dead sea and withered land.
He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising
himself on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that
they were in a kind of passage which behind them turned a corner.
Round the corner a long arm was groping, walking on its ﬁngers
towards Sam, who was lying nearest, and towards the hilt of the
sword that lay upon him.
At ﬁrst Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by
the incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He
wondered if he put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would
miss him, and he might ﬁnd some way out. He thought of himself
running free over the grass, grieving for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin,
but free and alive himself. Gandalf would admit that there had been
nothing else he could do.
But the courage that had been awakened in him was now too
strong: he could not leave his friends so easily. He wavered, groping
in his pocket, and then fought with himself again; and as he did so
the arm crept nearer. Suddenly resolve hardened in him, and he
seized a short sword that lay beside him, and kneeling he stooped
low over the bodies of his companions. With what strength he had
he hewed at the crawling arm near the wrist, and the hand broke off;
but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the hilt. There
was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a snarling
noise.
Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry’s face felt cold. All at

AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY

151

an important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle,
talkative, and inquisitive among the inhabitants, large and small, of
the four villages; and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and
for such travellers (mostly dwarves) as still journeyed on the East
Road, to and from the Mountains.
It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and his
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near
the village. They came to the West-gate and found it shut; but at the
door of the lodge beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up
and fetched a lantern and looked over the gate at them in surprise.
‘What do you want, and where do you come from?’ he asked
grufﬂy.
‘We are making for the inn here,’ answered Frodo. ‘We are journeying east and cannot go further tonight.’
‘Hobbits! Four hobbits! And what’s more, out of the Shire by their
talk,’ said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to himself. He stared
at them darkly for a moment, and then slowly opened the gate and
let them ride through.
‘We don’t often see Shire-folk riding on the Road at night,’ he
went on, as they halted a moment by his door. ‘You’ll pardon my
wondering what business takes you away east of Bree! What may
your names be, might I ask?’
‘Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem
a good place to discuss them,’ said Frodo, not liking the look of the
man or the tone of his voice.
‘Your business is your own, no doubt,’ said the man; ‘but it’s my
business to ask questions after nightfall.’
‘We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and
to stay at the inn here,’ put in Merry. ‘I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that
enough for you? The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers,
or so I had heard.’
‘All right, all right!’ said the man. ‘I meant no offence. But you’ll
ﬁnd maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate will be asking
you questions. There’s queer folk about. If you go on to The Pony,
you’ll ﬁnd you’re not the only guests.’
He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo
could see in the lantern-light that the man was still eyeing them
curiously. He was glad to hear the gate clang to behind them, as they
rode forward. He wondered why the man was so suspicious, and
whether anyone had been asking for news of a party of hobbits. Could
it have been Gandalf ? He might have arrived, while they were delayed
in the Forest and the Downs. But there was something in the look
and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.

166

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

but it’s no reason why we should let him go leading us out into some
dark place far from help, as he puts it.’
Pippin ﬁdgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply
to Sam, but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance
and looked away. ‘No,’ he said slowly. ‘I don’t agree. I think, I think
you are not really as you choose to look. You began to talk to me
like the Bree-folk, but your voice has changed. Still Sam seems right
in this: I don’t see why you should warn us to take care, and yet ask
us to take you on trust. Why the disguise? Who are you? What do
you really know about – about my business; and how do you know
it?’
‘The lesson in caution has been well learned,’ said Strider with a
grim smile. ‘But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You
will never get to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is
your only chance. You must make up your mind. I will answer
some of your questions, if that will help you to do so. But why
should you believe my story, if you do not trust me already? Still
here it is——’
At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. Butterbur
had arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot
water. Strider withdrew into a dark corner.
‘I’ve come to bid you good night,’ said the landlord, putting the
candles on the table. ‘Nob! Take the water to the rooms!’ He came
in and shut the door.
‘It’s like this,’ he began, hesitating and looking troubled. ‘If I’ve
done any harm, I’m sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another,
as you’ll admit; and I’m a busy man. But ﬁrst one thing and then
another this week have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and
not too late I hope. You see, I was asked to look out for hobbits of
the Shire, and for one by the name of Baggins in particular.’
‘And what has that got to do with me?’ asked Frodo.
‘Ah! you know best,’ said the landlord, knowingly. ‘I won’t give
you away; but I was told that this Baggins would be going by the
name of Underhill, and I was given a description that ﬁts you well
enough, if I may say so.’
‘Indeed! Let’s have it then!’ said Frodo, unwisely interrupting.
‘A stout little fellow with red cheeks,’ said Mr. Butterbur solemnly.
Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. ‘That won’t help you
much; it goes for most hobbits, Barley, he says to me,’ continued Mr.
Butterbur with a glance at Pippin. ‘But this one is taller than some and
fairer than most, and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright
eye. Begging your pardon, but he said it, not me.’
‘He said it? And who was he?’ asked Frodo eagerly.

STRIDER

167

‘Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they
say he is, but he’s a good friend of mine, whether or no. But now I
don’t know what he’ll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all
my ale sour or me into a block of wood, I shouldn’t wonder. He’s a
bit hasty. Still what’s done can’t be undone.’
‘Well, what have you done?’ said Frodo, getting impatient with
the slow unravelling of Butterbur’s thoughts.
‘Where was I?’ said the landlord, pausing and snapping his ﬁngers.
‘Ah, yes! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walked right into my
room without a knock. Barley, he says, I’m off in the morning. Will
you do something for me? You’ve only to name it, I said. I’m in a hurry,
said he, and I’ve no time myself, but I want a message took to the Shire.
Have you anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can ﬁnd someone, I
said, tomorrow, maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow, he says, and
then he gave me a letter.
‘It’s addressed plain enough,’ said Mr. Butterbur, producing a
letter from his pocket, and reading out the address slowly and proudly
(he valued his reputation as a lettered man):
Mr. FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE.
‘A letter for me from Gandalf !’ cried Frodo.
‘Ah!’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘Then your right name is Baggins?’
‘It is,’ said Frodo, ‘and you had better give me that letter at once,
and explain why you never sent it. That’s what you came to tell
me, I suppose, though you’ve taken a long time to come to the
point.’
Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled. ‘You’re right, master,’ he
said, ‘and I beg your pardon. And I’m mortal afraid of what Gandalf
will say, if harm comes of it. But I didn’t keep it back a-purpose. I
put it by safe. Then I couldn’t ﬁnd nobody willing to go to the Shire
next day, nor the day after, and none of my own folk were to spare;
and then one thing after another drove it out of my mind. I’m a busy
man. I’ll do what I can to set matters right, and if there’s any help
I can give, you’ve only to name it.
‘Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he
says to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may be coming out this
way before long, him and another. He’ll be calling himself Underhill. Mind
that! But you need ask no questions. And if I’m not with him, he may be
in trouble, and he may need help. Do whatever you can for him, and I’ll
be grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off,
seemingly.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘These black men,’ said the landlord lowering his voice. ‘They’re

168

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

looking for Baggins, and if they mean well, then I’m a hobbit. It was on
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming.
Uncanny, I called it. Nob, he came and told me that two black men
were at the door asking for a hobbit called Baggins. Nob’s hair was
all stood on end. I bid the black fellows be off, and slammed the
door on them; but they’ve been asking the same question all the way
to Archet, I hear. And that Ranger, Strider, he’s been asking questions, too. Tried to get in here to see you, before you’d had bite or
sup, he did.’
‘He did!’ said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the light.
‘And much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in,
Barliman.’
The landlord jumped with surprise. ‘You!’ he cried. ‘You’re always
popping up. What do you want now?’
‘He’s here with my leave,’ said Frodo. ‘He came to offer me his
help.’
‘Well, you know your own business, maybe,’ said Mr. Butterbur,
looking suspiciously at Strider. ‘But if I was in your plight, I wouldn’t
take up with a Ranger.’
‘Then who would you take up with?’ asked Strider. ‘A fat innkeeper
who only remembers his own name because people shout it at him
all day? They cannot stay in The Pony for ever, and they cannot go
home. They have a long road before them. Will you go with them
and keep the black men off ?’
‘Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn’t do that for any money,’ said Mr.
Butterbur, looking really scared. ‘But why can’t you stay here quiet
for a bit, Mr. Underhill? What are all these queer goings on? What
are these black men after, and where do they come from, I’d like to
know?’
‘I’m sorry I can’t explain it all,’ answered Frodo. ‘I am tired and
very worried, and it’s a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought
to warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your house.
These Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come
from——’
‘They come from Mordor,’ said Strider in a low voice. ‘From
Mordor, Barliman, if that means anything to you.’
‘Save us!’ cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evidently
was known to him. ‘That is the worst news that has come to Bree in
my time.’
‘It is,’ said Frodo. ‘Are you still willing to help me?’
‘I am,’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘More than ever. Though I don’t know
what the likes of me can do against, against——’ he faltered.
‘Against the Shadow in the East,’ said Strider quietly. ‘Not much,
Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here

STRIDER

169

tonight, as Mr. Underhill; and you can forget the name of Baggins,
till he is far away.’
‘I’ll do that,’ said Butterbur. ‘But they’ll ﬁnd out he’s here without
help from me, I’m afraid. It’s a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to
himself this evening, to say no more. The story of that Mr. Bilbo’s
going off has been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has
been doing some guessing in his slow pate; and there are others in
Bree quicker in the uptake than he is.’
‘Well, we can only hope the Riders won’t come back yet,’ said
Frodo.
‘I hope not, indeed,’ said Butterbur. ‘But spooks or no spooks,
they won’t get in The Pony so easy. Don’t you worry till the morning.
Nob’ll say no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while I can
stand on my legs. Me and my folk’ll keep watch tonight; but you
had best get some sleep, if you can.’
‘In any case we must be called at dawn,’ said Frodo. ‘We must
get off as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.’
‘Right! I’ll see to the orders,’ said the landlord. ‘Good night, Mr.
Baggins – Underhill, I should say! Good night – now, bless me!
Where’s your Mr. Brandybuck?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had forgotten all about Merry, and it was getting late. ‘I am afraid he is out.
He said something about going for a breath of air.’
‘Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might
be on a holiday!’ said Butterbur. ‘I must go and bar the doors quick,
but I’ll see your friend is let in when he comes. I’d better send Nob
to look for him. Good night to you all!’ At last Mr. Butterbur went
out, with another doubtful look at Strider and a shake of his head.
His footsteps retreated down the passage.
‘Well?’ said Strider. ‘When are you going to open that letter?’
Frodo looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly to be Gandalf ’s. Inside, written in the wizard’s strong but
graceful script, was the following message:
THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear’s Day, Shire Year, 1418.
Dear Frodo,
Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had better
leave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end of July at
latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow you, if I ﬁnd that
you are gone. Leave a message for me here, if you pass through Bree. You
can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our

170

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

business and will help you. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet
again. If I do not come, Elrond will advise you.
Yours in haste
GANDALF.
PS. Do NOT use It again, not for any reason whatever! Do not travel
by night!
PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn.
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a ﬁre shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken,
The crownless again shall be king.
PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy man, but his
memory is like a lumber-room: thing wanted always
buried. If he forgets, I shall roast him.
Fare Well!
Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and
Sam. ‘Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!’ he said. ‘He
deserves roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been
safe in Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf ?
He writes as if he was going into great danger.’
‘He has been doing that for many years,’ said Strider.
Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about
Gandalf ’s second postscript. ‘Why didn’t you tell me that you were
Gandalf ’s friend at once?’ he asked. ‘It would have saved time.’
‘Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?’ said
Strider. ‘I knew nothing of this letter. For all I knew I had to persuade
you to trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I
did not intend to tell you all about myself at once. I had to study
you ﬁrst, and make sure of you. The Enemy has set traps for me
before now. As soon as I had made up my mind, I was ready to tell
you whatever you asked. But I must admit,’ he added with a queer
laugh, ‘that I hoped you would take to me for my own sake. A hunted
man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for friendship. But there,
I believe my looks are against me.’
‘They are – at ﬁrst sight at any rate,’ laughed Pippin with sudden

STRIDER

171

relief after reading Gandalf ’s letter. ‘But handsome is as handsome
does, as we say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much
the same after lying for days in hedges and ditches.’
‘It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering in the Wild to make you look like Strider,’ he answered. ‘And
you would die ﬁrst, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you
look to be.’
Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed
Strider dubiously. ‘How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf
speaks about?’ he demanded. ‘You never mentioned Gandalf, till this
letter came out. You might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see,
trying to get us to go with you. You might have done in the real
Strider and took his clothes. What have you to say to that?’
‘That you are a stout fellow,’ answered Strider; ‘but I am afraid
my only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real
Strider, I could kill you. And I should have killed you already without
so much talk. If I was after the Ring, I could have it – now!’
He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes
gleamed a light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak,
he laid his hand on the hilt of a sword that had hung concealed by
his side. They did not dare to move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring
at him dumbly.
‘But I am the real Strider, fortunately,’ he said, looking down at
them with his face softened by a sudden smile. ‘I am Aragorn son of
Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save you, I will.’
There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesitation. ‘I
believed that you were a friend before the letter came,’ he said, ‘or
at least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight,
but never in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I
imagine. I think one of his spies would – well, seem fairer and feel
fouler, if you understand.’
‘I see,’ laughed Strider. ‘I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? All that
is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.’
‘Did the verses apply to you then?’ asked Frodo. ‘I could not make
out what they were about. But how did you know that they were in
Gandalf ’s letter, if you have never seen it?’
‘I did not know,’ he answered. ‘But I am Aragorn, and those verses
go with that name.’ He drew out his sword, and they saw that the
blade was indeed broken a foot below the hilt. ‘Not much use is it,
Sam?’ said Strider. ‘But the time is near when it shall be forged
anew.’
Sam said nothing.
‘Well,’ said Strider, ‘with Sam’s permission we will call that settled.

172

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Strider shall be your guide. And now I think it is time you went to
bed and took what rest you can. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we are allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can
hardly hope now to leave it unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as
soon as possible. I know one or two ways out of Bree-land other than
the main road. If once we shake off the pursuit, I shall make for
Weathertop.’
‘Weathertop?’ said Sam. ‘What’s that?’
‘It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way from
here to Rivendell. It commands a wide view all round; and there we
shall have a chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that
point, if he follows us. After Weathertop our journey will become
more difﬁcult, and we shall have to choose between various dangers.’
‘When did you last see Gandalf ?’ asked Frodo. ‘Do you know
where he is, or what he is doing?’
Strider looked grave. ‘I do not know,’ he said. ‘I came west with
him in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire
in the last few years, when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it
unguarded. We last met on the ﬁrst of May: at Sarn Ford down the
Brandywine. He told me that his business with you had gone well,
and that you would be starting for Rivendell in the last week of
September. As I knew he was at your side, I went away on a journey
of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some news reached
him, and I was not at hand to help.
‘I am troubled, for the ﬁrst time since I have known him. We
should have had messages, even if he could not come himself. When
I returned, many days ago, I heard the ill news. The tidings had gone
far and wide that Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been
seen. It was the Elven-folk of Gildor that told me this; and later
they told me that you had left your home; but there was no news
of your leaving Buckland. I have been watching the East Road
anxiously.’
‘Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it – with
Gandalf ’s absence, I mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him,
except the Enemy himself,’ said Strider. ‘But do not give up hope!
Gandalf is greater than you Shire-folk know – as a rule you can only
see his jokes and toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest
task.’
Pippin yawned. ‘I am sorry,’ he said, ‘but I am dead tired. In spite
of all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit.
Where is that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we
had to go out in the dark to look for him.’
*
*
*

STRIDER

173

At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running
along the passage. Merry came in with a rush followed by Nob. He
shut the door hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath.
They stared at him in alarm for a moment before he gasped: ‘I have
seen them, Frodo! I have seen them! Black Riders!’
‘Black Riders!’ cried Frodo. ‘Where?’
‘Here. In the village. I stayed indoors for an hour. Then as you
did not come back, I went out for a stroll. I had come back again
and was standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the
stars. Suddenly I shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a sort of deeper shade among the shadows across
the road, just beyond the edge of the lamplight. It slid away at once
into the dark without a sound. There was no horse.’
‘Which way did it go?’ asked Strider, suddenly and sharply.
Merry started, noticing the stranger for the ﬁrst time. ‘Go on!’
said Frodo. ‘This is a friend of Gandalf ’s. I will explain later.’
‘It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,’ continued Merry.
‘I tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went
round the corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.’
Strider looked at Merry with wonder. ‘You have a stout heart,’ he
said; ‘but it was foolish.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Merry. ‘Neither brave nor silly, I think. I could
hardly help myself. I seemed to be drawn somehow. Anyway, I went,
and suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and
the other was whispering, or hissing. I couldn’t hear a word that was
said. I did not creep any closer, because I began to tremble all over.
Then I felt terriﬁed, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt
home, when something came behind me and I...I fell over.’
‘I found him, sir,’ put in Nob. ‘Mr. Butterbur sent me out with
a lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards
South-gate. Just nigh Bill Ferny’s house I thought I could see something in the Road. I couldn’t swear to it, but it looked to me as if
two men was stooping over something, lifting it. I gave a shout, but
when I got up to the spot there was no signs of them, and only Mr.
Brandybuck lying by the roadside. He seemed to be asleep. ‘‘I thought
I had fallen into deep water,’’ he says to me, when I shook him. Very
queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he got up and ran
back here like a hare.’
‘I am afraid that’s true,’ said Merry, ‘though I don’t know what I
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can’t remember. I went to pieces.
I don’t know what came over me.’
‘I do,’ said Strider. ‘The Black Breath. The Riders must have left
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in
secret. They will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill

174

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Ferny; and probably that Southerner was a spy as well. Something
may happen in the night, before we leave Bree.’
‘What will happen?’ said Merry. ‘Will they attack the inn?’
‘No, I think not,’ said Strider. ‘They are not all here yet. And in
any case that is not their way. In dark and loneliness they are strongest; they will not openly attack a house where there are lights and
many people – not until they are desperate, not while all the long
leagues of Eriador still lie before us. But their power is in terror, and
already some in Bree are in their clutch. They will drive these wretches
to some evil work: Ferny, and some of the strangers, and, maybe,
the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at West-gate on
Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when they
left him.’
‘We seem to have enemies all round,’ said Frodo. ‘What are we
to do?’
‘Stay here, and do not go to your rooms! They are sure to have
found out which those are. The hobbit-rooms have windows looking
north and close to the ground. We will all remain together and bar
this window and the door. But ﬁrst Nob and I will fetch your luggage.’
While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of
all that had happened since supper. Merry was still reading and
pondering Gandalf ’s letter when Strider and Nob returned.
‘Well Masters,’ said Nob, ‘I’ve rufﬂed up the clothes and put in
a bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a nice imitation
of your head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag – Underhill, sir,’
he added with a grin.
Pippin laughed. ‘Very life-like!’ he said. ‘But what will happen
when they have penetrated the disguise?’
‘We shall see,’ said Strider. ‘Let us hope to hold the fort till
morning.’
‘Good night to you,’ said Nob, and went off to take his part in
the watch on the doors.
Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-ﬂoor. They pushed
a low chair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo
saw that the night was still clear. The Sickle* was swinging bright
above the shoulders of Bree-hill. He then closed and barred the heavy
inside shutters and drew the curtains together. Strider built up the
ﬁre and blew out all the candles.
The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet towards the
hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair against the door. They
talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask.
‘Jumped over the Moon!’ chuckled Merry as he rolled himself in
* The Hobbits’ name for the Plough or Great Bear.

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

183

Their camping-place was damp, cold, and uncomfortable; and the
biting insects would not let them sleep. There were also abominable
creatures haunting the reeds and tussocks that from the sound of
them were evil relatives of the cricket. There were thousands of them,
and they squeaked all round, neek-breek, breek-neek, unceasingly all
the night, until the hobbits were nearly frantic.
The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night almost
as comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them)
had been left behind, the midges still pursued them.
As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him
that far away there came a light in the eastern sky: it ﬂashed and
faded many times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours
off.
‘What is the light?’ he said to Strider, who had risen, and was
standing, gazing ahead into the night.
‘I do not know,’ Strider answered. ‘It is too distant to make out.
It is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.’
Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the
white ﬂashes, and against them the tall dark ﬁgure of Strider, standing
silent and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep.
They had not gone far on the ﬁfth day when they left the last
straggling pools and reed-beds of the marshes behind them. The land
before them began steadily to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could now see a line of hills. The highest of them was at
the right of the line and a little separated from the others. It had a
conical top, slightly ﬂattened at the summit.
‘That is Weathertop,’ said Strider. ‘The Old Road, which we have
left far away on our right, runs to the south of it and passes not far
from its foot. We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we go straight
towards it. I suppose we had better do so.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall ﬁnd.
It is close to the Road.’
‘But surely we were hoping to ﬁnd Gandalf there?’
‘Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he may not
pass through Bree, and so he may not know what we are doing. And
anyway, unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one
another; it will not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the
Riders fail to ﬁnd us in the wilderness, they are likely to make for
Weathertop themselves. It commands a wide view all round. Indeed,
there are many birds and beasts in this country that could see us, as
we stand here, from that hill-top. Not all the birds are to be trusted,
and there are other spies more evil than they are.’

186

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam’s.
‘Don’t stop!’ said Merry.
‘That’s all I know,’ stammered Sam, blushing. ‘I learned it from
Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing
how I was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as
taught me my letters. He was mighty book-learned was dear old
Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote poetry. He wrote what I have just said.’
‘He did not make it up,’ said Strider. ‘It is part of the lay that is
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must
have translated it. I never knew that.’
‘There was a lot more,’ said Sam, ‘all about Mordor. I didn’t learn
that part, it gave me the shivers. I never thought I should be going
that way myself !’
‘Going to Mordor!’ cried Pippin. ‘I hope it won’t come to that!’
‘Do not speak that name so loudly!’ said Strider.
It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of
the path, and saw before them, in the pale clear light of the October
sun, a grey-green bank, leading up like a bridge on to the northward
slope of the hill. They decided to make for the top at once, while the
daylight was broad. Concealment was no longer possible, and they
could only hope that no enemy or spy was observing them. Nothing
was to be seen moving on the hill. If Gandalf was anywhere about,
there was no sign of him.
On the western ﬂank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow,
at the bottom of which there was a bowl-shaped dell with grassy
sides. There they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs
and luggage. The other three went on. After half an hour’s plodding
climb Strider reached the crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last slope had been steep and rocky.
On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of ancient
stone-work, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in
the centre a cairn of broken stones had been piled. They were blackened as if with ﬁre. About them the turf was burned to the roots and
all within the ring the grass was scorched and shrivelled, as if ﬂames
had swept the hill-top; but there was no sign of any living thing.
Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all round
below them a wide prospect, for the most part of lands empty and
featureless, except for patches of woodland away to the south, beyond
which they caught here and there the glint of distant water. Beneath
them on this southern side there ran like a ribbon the Old Road,
coming out of the West and winding up and down, until it faded
behind a ridge of dark land to the east. Nothing was moving on it.
Following its line eastward with their eyes they saw the Mountains:

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

187

the nearer foothills were brown and sombre; behind them stood taller
shapes of grey, and behind those again were high white peaks glimmering among the clouds.
‘Well, here we are!’ said Merry. ‘And very cheerless and uninviting
it looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf.
But I don’t blame him for not waiting – if he ever came here.’
‘I wonder,’ said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. ‘Even if he
was a day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here ﬁrst.
He can ride very swiftly when need presses.’ Suddenly he stooped
and looked at the stone on the top of the cairn; it was ﬂatter than
the others, and whiter, as if it had escaped the ﬁre. He picked it up
and examined it, turning it in his ﬁngers. ‘This has been handled
recently,’ he said. ‘What do you think of these marks?’
On the ﬂat under-side Frodo saw some scratches:
. ‘There
seems to be a stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,’ he said.
‘The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches,’
said Strider. ‘It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot
be sure. The scratches are ﬁne, and they certainly look fresh. But the
marks might mean something quite different, and have nothing to
do with us. Rangers use runes, and they come here sometimes.’
‘What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?’ asked Merry.
‘I should say,’ answered Strider, ‘that they stood for G3, and were
a sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days
ago now. It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was
at hand, so that he had no time or did not dare to write anything
longer or plainer. If that is so, we must be wary.’
‘I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they
may mean,’ said Frodo. ‘It would be a great comfort to know that
he was on the way, in front of us or behind us.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Strider. ‘For myself, I believe that he was here,
and was in danger. There have been scorching ﬂames here; and now
the light that we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back
to my mind. I guess that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with
what result I cannot tell. He is here no longer, and we must now
look after ourselves and make our own way to Rivendell, as best we
can.’
‘How far is Rivendell?’ asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The
world looked wild and wide from Weathertop.
‘I don’t know if the Road has ever been measured in miles beyond
the Forsaken Inn, a day’s journey east of Bree,’ answered Strider.
‘Some say it is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road,
and folk are glad to reach their journey’s end, whether the time is
long or short. But I know how long it would take me on my own
feet, with fair weather and no ill fortune: twelve days from here to

188

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses the Loudwater that
runs out of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight’s journey before
us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.’
‘A fortnight!’ said Frodo. ‘A lot may happen in that time.’
‘It may,’ said Strider.
They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward
edge. In that lonely place Frodo for the ﬁrst time fully realized his
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left
him in the quiet and beloved Shire. He stared down at the hateful
Road, leading back westward – to his home. Suddenly he was aware
that two black specks were moving slowly along it, going westward;
and looking again he saw that three others were creeping eastward
to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched Strider’s arm.
‘Look,’ he said, pointing downwards.
At once Strider ﬂung himself on the ground behind the ruined
circle, pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside.
‘What is it?’ he whispered.
‘I do not know, but I fear the worst,’ answered Strider.
Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and peered
through a cleft between two jagged stones. The light was no longer
bright, for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of
the East had now overtaken the sun, as it began to go down. They
could all see the black specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could
make out their shapes for certain; yet something told them that there,
far below, were Black Riders assembling on the Road beyond the
foot of the hill.
‘Yes,’ said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt. ‘The
enemy is here!’
Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the
hill to ﬁnd their companions.
Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored the small
dell and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they found a spring
of clear water in the hillside, and near it footprints not more than a
day or two old. In the dell itself they found recent traces of a ﬁre,
and other signs of a hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on
the edge of the dell nearest to the hill. Behind them Sam came upon
a small store of ﬁrewood neatly stacked.
‘I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,’ he said to Pippin. ‘Whoever it was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.’
Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. ‘I wish I had
waited and explored the ground down here myself,’ he said, hurrying
off to the spring to examine the footprints.

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

189

‘It is just as I feared,’ he said, when he came back. ‘Sam and
Pippin have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or
confused. Rangers have been here lately. It is they who left the ﬁrewood behind. But there are also several newer tracks that were not
made by Rangers. At least one set was made, only a day or two ago,
by heavy boots. At least one. I cannot now be certain, but I think there
were many booted feet.’ He paused and stood in anxious thought.
Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and
booted Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, the sooner
Strider led them somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow
with great dislike, now that he had heard news of their enemies on
the Road, only a few miles away.
‘Hadn’t we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?’ he asked impatiently. ‘It is getting late, and I don’t like this hole: it makes my
heart sink somehow.’
‘Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,’ answered
Strider, looking up and considering the time and the weather. ‘Well,
Sam,’ he said at last, ‘I do not like this place either; but I cannot
think of anywhere better that we could reach before nightfall. At least
we are out of sight for the moment, and if we moved we should be
much more likely to be seen by spies. All we could do would be to
go right out of our way back north on this side of the line of hills,
where the land is all much the same as it is here. The Road is watched,
but we should have to cross it, if we tried to take cover in the thickets
away to the south. On the north side of the Road beyond the hills
the country is bare and ﬂat for miles.’
‘Can the Riders see?’ asked Merry. ‘I mean, they seem usually to
have used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling
is the right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down
ﬂat when you saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen,
if we move.’
‘I was too careless on the hill-top,’ answered Strider. ‘I was very
anxious to ﬁnd some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three
of us to go up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see,
and the Riders can use men and other creatures as spies, as we found
at Bree. They themselves do not see the world of light as we do, but
our shapes cast shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun
destroys; and in the dark they perceive many signs and forms that
are hidden from us: then they are most to be feared. And at all times
they smell the blood of living things, desiring and hating it. Senses,
too, there are other than sight or smell. We can feel their presence
– it troubled our hearts, as soon as we came here, and before we saw
them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,’ he added, and his voice sank
to a whisper, ‘the Ring draws them.’

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

191

good and evil deeds of the Elder Days. They wondered how old he
was, and where he had learned all this lore.
‘Tell us of Gil-galad,’ said Merry suddenly, when he paused at
the end of a story of the Elf-kingdoms. ‘Do you know any more of
that old lay that you spoke of ?’
‘I do indeed,’ answered Strider. ‘So also does Frodo, for it concerns us closely.’ Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring
into the ﬁre.
‘I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,’ said Frodo slowly.
‘Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth.
Gil-galad is Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he
went to the land of——’
‘No!’ said Strider interrupting, ‘I do not think that tale should be
told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through
to the house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.’
‘Then tell us some other tale of the old days,’ begged Sam; ‘a tale
about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear
more about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.’
‘I will tell you the tale of Tinúviel,’ said Strider, ‘in brief – for it
is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now,
except Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a
fair tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet
it may lift up your hearts.’ He was silent for some time, and then he
began not to speak but to chant softly:
The leaves were long, the grass was green,
The hemlock-umbels tall and fair,
And in the glade a light was seen
Of stars in shadow shimmering.
Tinúviel was dancing there
To music of a pipe unseen,
And light of stars was in her hair,
And in her raiment glimmering.
There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves,
And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing.
He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wonder ﬂowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves,
And her hair like shadow following.

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

195

encircled them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or movement in the night. Frodo stirred, feeling that he must break the
silence: he longed to shout out aloud.
‘Hush!’ whispered Strider. ‘What’s that?’ gasped Pippin at the
same moment.
Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the hill, they
felt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, one shadow or more than one.
They strained their eyes, and the shadows seemed to grow. Soon
there could be no doubt: three or four tall black ﬁgures were standing
there on the slope, looking down on them. So black were they that
they seemed like black holes in the deep shade behind them. Frodo
thought that he heard a faint hiss as of venomous breath and felt a
thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly advanced.
Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves
ﬂat on the ground. Sam shrank to Frodo’s side. Frodo was hardly
less terriﬁed than his companions; he was quaking as if he was bitter
cold, but his terror was swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put
on the Ring. The desire to do this laid hold of him, and he could
think of nothing else. He did not forget the Barrow, nor the message
of Gandalf; but something seemed to be compelling him to disregard
all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with the hope of escape,
or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt that he must
take the Ring and put it on his ﬁnger. He could not speak. He felt
Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great
trouble, but he could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and
struggled for a while; but resistance became unbearable, and at last
he slowly drew out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the foreﬁnger
of his left hand.
Immediately, though everything else remained as before, dim and
dark, the shapes became terribly clear. He was able to see beneath
their black wrappings. There were ﬁve tall ﬁgures: two standing on
the lip of the dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned keen
and merciless eyes; under their mantles were long grey robes; upon
their grey hairs were helms of silver; in their haggard hands were
swords of steel. Their eyes fell on him and pierced him, as they rushed
towards him. Desperate, he drew his own sword, and it seemed to
him that it ﬂickered red, as if it was a ﬁrebrand. Two of the ﬁgures
halted. The third was taller than the others: his hair was long and
gleaming and on his helm was a crown. In one hand he held a long
sword, and in the other a knife; both the knife and the hand that
held it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down
on Frodo.
At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and
he heard himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same

198

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Sam choked with tears. ‘Don’t despair!’ said Strider. ‘You must
trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had guessed,
though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and I
think he will resist the evil power of the wound longer than his
enemies expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him
well, while I am away!’ He hurried off and disappeared again into
the darkness.
Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and
a deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side.
His friends watched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound.
The night passed slowly and wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky,
and the dell was ﬁlling with grey light, when Strider at last returned.
‘Look!’ he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a black
cloak that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the
lower hem there was a slash. ‘This was the stroke of Frodo’s sword,’
he said. ‘The only hurt that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is
unharmed, but all blades perish that pierce that dreadful King. More
deadly to him was the name of Elbereth.’
‘And more deadly to Frodo was this!’ He stooped again and lifted
up a long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised
it they saw that near the end its edge was notched and the point was
broken off. But even as he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in
astonishment, for the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke
in the air, leaving only the hilt in Strider’s hand. ‘Alas!’ he cried. ‘It
was this accursed knife that gave the wound. Few now have the skill in
healing to match such evil weapons. But I will do what I can.’
He sat down on the ground, and taking the dagger-hilt laid it on
his knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then
setting it aside, he turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words
the others could not catch. From the pouch at his belt he drew out
the long leaves of a plant.
‘These leaves,’ he said, ‘I have walked far to ﬁnd; for this plant
does not grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets away south of the
Road I found it in the dark by the scent of its leaves.’ He crushed a
leaf in his ﬁngers, and it gave out a sweet and pungent fragrance. ‘It
is fortunate that I could ﬁnd it, for it is a healing plant that the Men
of the West brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they named it, and it
grows now sparsely and only near places where they dwelt or camped
of old; and it is not known in the North, except to some of those
who wander in the Wild. It has great virtues, but over such a wound
as this its healing powers may be small.’
He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo’s shoulder. The fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

199

unhurt felt their minds calmed and cleared. The herb had also some
power over the wound, for Frodo felt the pain and also the sense of
frozen cold lessen in his side; but the life did not return to his arm,
and he could not raise or use his hand. He bitterly regretted his
foolishness, and reproached himself for weakness of will; for he now
perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed not his own desire
but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he would
remain maimed for life, and how they would now manage to continue
their journey. He felt too weak to stand.
The others were discussing this very question. They quickly
decided to leave Weathertop as soon as possible. ‘I think now,’ said
Strider, ‘that the enemy has been watching this place for some days.
If Gandalf ever came here, then he must have been forced to ride
away, and he will not return. In any case we are in great peril here
after dark, since the attack of last night, and we can hardly meet
greater danger wherever we go.’
As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried food and
packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided the
greater part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo
on the pony. In the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed fatter and stronger, and had begun to show
an affection for its new masters, especially for Sam. Bill Ferny’s
treatment must have been very hard for the journey in the wild to
seem so much better than its former life.
They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing
the Road, but it was the quickest way to more wooded country. And
they needed fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm,
especially at night, while ﬁre would be some protection for them all.
It was also his plan to shorten their journey by cutting across another
great loop of the Road: east beyond Weathertop it changed its course
and took a wide bend northwards.
They made their way slowly and cautiously round the southwestern slopes of the hill, and came in a little while to the edge of
the Road. There was no sign of the Riders. But even as they were
hurrying across they heard far away two cries: a cold voice calling
and a cold voice answering. Trembling they sprang forward, and
made for the thickets that lay ahead. The land before them sloped
away southwards, but it was wild and pathless; bushes and stunted
trees grew in dense patches with wide barren spaces in between. The
grass was scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the thickets were
faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey was slow
and gloomy. They spoke little as they trudged along. Frodo’s heart
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads

206

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

by Gandalf, quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves
and one hobbit.’
‘I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!’ said Pippin. He
knew the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it often; but as a
matter of fact he had never more than half believed it. Even now he
looked at the stone trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic
might not suddenly bring them to life again.
‘You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever
knew about trolls,’ said Strider. ‘It is broad daylight with a bright
sun, and yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale of live
trolls waiting for us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed
that one of them has an old bird’s nest behind his ear. That would
be a most unusual ornament for a live troll!’
They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the reminder of
Bilbo’s ﬁrst successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was
warm and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be
lifting a little. They rested for some time in the glade, and took their
mid-day meal right under the shadow of the trolls’ large legs.
‘Won’t somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is high?’
said Merry, when they had ﬁnished. ‘We haven’t had a song or a tale
for days.’
‘Not since Weathertop,’ said Frodo. The others looked at him.
‘Don’t worry about me!’ he added. ‘I feel much better, but I don’t
think I could sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his
memory.’
‘Come on, Sam!’ said Merry. ‘There’s more stored in your head
than you let on about.’
‘I don’t know about that,’ said Sam. ‘But how would this suit? It
ain’t what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of
nonsense. But these old images here brought it to my mind.’ Standing
up, with his hands behind his back, as if he was at school, he began
to sing to an old tune.
Troll sat alone on his seat of stone,
And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;
For many a year he had gnawed it near,
For meat was hard to come by.
Done by! Gum by!
In a cave in the hills he dwelt alone,
And meat was hard to come by.
Up came Tom with his big boots on.
Said he to Troll: ‘Pray, what is yon?
For it looks like the shin o’ my nuncle Tim,

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

As should be a-lyin’ in graveyard.
Caveyard! Paveyard!
This many a year has Tim been gone,
And I thought he were lyin’ in graveyard.’
‘My lad,’ said Troll, ‘this bone I stole.
But what be bones that lie in a hole?
Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o’ lead,
Afore I found his shinbone.
Tinbone! Thinbone!
He can spare a share for a poor old troll,
For he don’t need his shinbone.’
Said Tom: ‘I don’t see why the likes o’ thee
Without axin’ leave should go makin’ free
With the shank or the shin o’ my father’s kin;
So hand the old bone over!
Rover! Trover!
Though dead he be, it belongs to he;
So hand the old bone over!’
‘For a couple o’ pins,’ says Troll, and grins,
‘I’ll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins.
A bit o’ fresh meat will go down sweet!
I’ll try my teeth on thee now.
Hee now! See now!
I’m tired o’ gnawing old bones and skins;
I’ve a mind to dine on thee now.’
But just as he thought his dinner was caught,
He found his hands had hold of naught.
Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind
And gave him the boot to larn him.
Warn him! Darn him!
A bump o’ the boot on the seat, Tom thought,
Would be the way to larn him.
But harder than stone is the ﬂesh and bone
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone.
As well set your boot to the mountain’s root,
For the seat of a troll don’t feel it.
Peel it! Heal it!
Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan,
And he knew his toes could feel it.

207

208

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Tom’s leg is game, since home he came,
And his bootless foot is lasting lame;
But Troll don’t care, and he’s still there
With the bone he boned from its owner.
Doner! Boner!
Troll’s old seat is still the same,
And the bone he boned from its owner!
‘Well, that’s a warning to us all!’ laughed Merry. ‘It is as well you
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!’
‘Where did you come by that, Sam?’ asked Pippin. ‘I’ve never
heard those words before.’
Sam muttered something inaudible. ‘It’s out of his own head, of
course,’ said Frodo. ‘I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this
journey. First he was a conspirator, now he’s a jester. He’ll end up
by becoming a wizard – or a warrior!’
‘I hope not,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t want to be neither!’
In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were probably following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves
had used many years before. After a few miles they came out on the
top of a high bank above the Road. At this point the Road had left
the Hoarwell far behind in its narrow valley, and now clung close to
the feet of the hills, rolling and winding eastward among woods and
heather-covered slopes towards the Ford and the Mountains. Not
far down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the grass. On it
roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen dwarf-runes
and secret marks.
‘There!’ said Merry. ‘That must be the stone that marked the
place where the trolls’ gold was hidden. How much is left of Bilbo’s
share, I wonder, Frodo?’
Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had brought
home no treasure more perilous, nor less easy to part with. ‘None at
all,’ he said. ‘Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it
was really his, as it came from robbers.’
The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early evening. There
was no sign of any other travellers to be seen. As there was now no
other possible course for them to take, they climbed down the bank,
and turning left went off as fast as they could. Soon a shoulder of
the hills cut off the light of the fast westering sun. A cold wind ﬂowed
down to meet them from the mountains ahead.
They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road, where
they could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that brought

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

209

sudden fear back into their hearts: the noise of hoofs behind them.
They looked back, but they could not see far because of the many
windings and rollings of the Road. As quickly as they could they
scrambled off the beaten way and up into the deep heather and
bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, until they came to a small
patch of thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among the
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and grey in the failing light,
some thirty feet below them. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. They
were going fast, with a light clippety-clippety-clip. Then faintly, as if it
was blown away from them by the breeze, they seemed to catch a
dim ringing, as of small bells tinkling.
‘That does not sound like a Black Rider’s horse!’ said Frodo,
listening intently. The other hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not,
but they all remained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of
pursuit for so long that any sound from behind seemed ominous and
unfriendly. But Strider was now leaning forward, stooped to the
ground, with a hand to his ear, and a look of joy on his face.
The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly. Clearer
and nearer now the bells jingled, and clippety-clip came the quick
trotting feet. Suddenly into view below came a white horse, gleaming
in the shadows, running swiftly. In the dusk its headstall ﬂickered
and ﬂashed, as if it were studded with gems like living stars. The
rider’s cloak streamed behind him, and his hood was thrown back;
his golden hair ﬂowed shimmering in the wind of his speed. To Frodo
it appeared that a white light was shining through the form and
raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil.
Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road,
leaping with a cry through the heather; but even before he had moved
or called, the rider had reined in his horse and halted, looking up
towards the thicket where they stood. When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet him calling out: Ai na vedui Dúnadan! Mae
govannen! His speech and clear ringing voice left no doubt in their
hearts: the rider was of the Elven-folk. No others that dwelt in the
wide world had voices so fair to hear. But there seemed to be a note
of haste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was now speaking
quickly and urgently to Strider.
Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the bushes
and hurried down to the Road. ‘This is Glorﬁndel, who dwells in
the house of Elrond,’ said Strider.
‘Hail, and well met at last!’ said the Elf-lord to Frodo. ‘I was sent
from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger
upon the road.’
‘Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?’ cried Frodo joyfully.
‘No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,’

210

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

answered Glorﬁndel. ‘Elrond received news that troubled him. Some
of my kindred, journeying in your land beyond the Baranduin,*
learned that things were amiss, and sent messages as swiftly as they
could. They said that the Nine were abroad, and that you were
astray bearing a great burden without guidance, for Gandalf had not
returned. There are few even in Rivendell that can ride openly against
the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond sent out north, west, and
south. It was thought that you might turn far aside to avoid pursuit,
and become lost in the Wilderness.
‘It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge of
Mitheithel, and left a token there, nigh on seven days ago. Three of
the servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge, but they withdrew and
I pursued them westward. I came also upon two others, but they
turned away southward. Since then I have searched for your trail.
Two days ago I found it, and followed it over the Bridge; and today
I marked where you descended from the hills again. But come! There
is no time for further news. Since you are here we must risk the peril
of the Road and go. There are ﬁve behind us, and when they ﬁnd
your trail upon the Road they will ride after us like the wind. And
they are not all. Where the other four may be, I do not know. I fear
that we may ﬁnd the Ford is already held against us.’
While Glorﬁndel was speaking the shades of evening deepened.
Frodo felt a great weariness come over him. Ever since the sun began
to sink the mist before his eyes had darkened, and he felt that a
shadow was coming between him and the faces of his friends. Now
pain assailed him, and he felt cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam’s
arm.
‘My master is sick and wounded,’ said Sam angrily. ‘He can’t go
on riding after nightfall. He needs rest.’
Glorﬁndel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him
gently in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety.
Brieﬂy Strider told of the attack on their camp under Weathertop,
and of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept,
and handed it to the Elf. Glorﬁndel shuddered as he took it, but he
looked intently at it.
‘There are evil things written on this hilt,’ he said; ‘though
maybe your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we reach
the house of Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may!
Alas! the wounds of this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will
do what I can – but all the more do I urge you now to go on without
rest.’
He searched the wound on Frodo’s shoulder with his ﬁngers, and
* The Brandywine River.

Chapter 1
MANY MEETINGS
Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At ﬁrst he thought that
he had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on
the edge of memory. Or perhaps he had been ill? But the ceiling
looked strange; it was ﬂat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He
lay a little while longer looking at patches of sunlight on the wall,
and listening to the sound of a waterfall.
‘Where am I, and what is the time?’ he said aloud to the ceiling.
‘In the house of Elrond, and it is ten o’clock in the morning,’ said
a voice. ‘It is the morning of October the twenty-fourth, if you want
to know.’
‘Gandalf !’ cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting
in a chair by the open window.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after
all the absurd things you have done since you left home.’
Frodo lay down again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to
argue, and in any case he did not think he would get the better of
an argument. He was fully awake now, and the memory of his
journey was returning: the disastrous ‘short cut’ through the Old
Forest; the ‘accident’ at The Prancing Pony; and his madness in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking
of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to
his arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the
soft puffs of Gandalf ’s pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the
window.
‘Where’s Sam?’ Frodo asked at length. ‘And are the others all
right?’
‘Yes, they are all safe and sound,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Sam was
here until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.’
‘What happened at the Ford?’ said Frodo. ‘It all seemed so dim,
somehow; and it still does.’
‘Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,’ answered Gandalf.
‘The wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you
would have been beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you,
my dear hobbit! As you showed in the Barrow. That was touch and
go: perhaps the most dangerous moment of all. I wish you could
have held out at Weathertop.’
‘You seem to know a great deal already,’ said Frodo. ‘I have not
spoken to the others about the Barrow. At ﬁrst it was too horrible,

220

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and afterwards there were other things to think about. How do you
know about it?’
‘You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,’ said Gandalf gently,
‘and it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory.
Do not worry! Though I said ‘‘absurd’’ just now, I did not mean it.
I think well of you – and of the others. It is no small feat to have
come so far, and through such dangers, still bearing the Ring.’
‘We should never have done it without Strider,’ said Frodo. ‘But
we needed you. I did not know what to do without you.’
‘I was delayed,’ said Gandalf, ‘and that nearly proved our ruin.
And yet I am not sure: it may have been better so.’
‘I wish you would tell me what happened!’
‘All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about
anything today, by Elrond’s orders.’
‘But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are
quite as tiring,’ said Frodo. ‘I am wide awake now, and I remember
so many things that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You
ought to tell me that at least.’
‘You will soon hear all you wish to know,’ said Gandalf. ‘We shall
have a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I
will only say that I was held captive.’
‘You?’ cried Frodo.
‘Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,’ said the wizard solemnly. ‘There are
many powers in the world, for good or for evil. Some are greater
than I am. Against some I have not yet been measured. But my time
is coming. The Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth.
War is preparing!’
‘Then you knew of the Riders already – before I met them?’
‘Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the
Black Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of
the Rings. But I did not know that they had arisen again or I should
have ﬂed with you at once. I heard news of them only after I left you
in June; but that story must wait. For the moment we have been
saved from disaster, by Aragorn.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo, ‘it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid
of him at ﬁrst. Sam never quite trusted him, I think, not at any rate
until we met Glorﬁndel.’
Gandalf smiled. ‘I have heard all about Sam,’ he said. ‘He has no
more doubts now.’
‘I am glad,’ said Frodo. ‘For I have become very fond of Strider.
Well, fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he
is strange, and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I
didn’t know that any of the Big People were like that. I thought,
well, that they were just big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like

MANY MEETINGS

221

Butterbur; or stupid and wicked like Bill Ferny. But then we don’t
know much about Men in the Shire, except perhaps the Bree-landers.’
‘You don’t know much even about them, if you think old Barliman
is stupid,’ said Gandalf. ‘He is wise enough on his own ground. He
thinks less than he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick
wall in time (as they say in Bree). But there are few left in Middleearth like Aragorn son of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over
the Sea is nearly at an end. It may be that this War of the Ring will
be their last adventure.’
‘Do you really mean that Strider is one of the people of the old
Kings?’ said Frodo in wonder. ‘I thought they had all vanished long
ago. I thought he was only a Ranger.’
‘Only a Ranger!’ cried Gandalf. ‘My dear Frodo, that is just what
the Rangers are: the last remnant in the North of the great people,
the Men of the West. They have helped me before; and I shall
need their help in the days to come; for we have reached Rivendell,
but the Ring is not yet at rest.’
‘I suppose not,’ said Frodo. ‘But so far my only thought has been
to get here; and I hope I shan’t have to go any further. It is very
pleasant just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and
I ﬁnd that has been as much as I want.’
He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. ‘I
have been reckoning,’ he said, ‘and I can’t bring the total up to
October the twenty-fourth. It ought to be the twenty-ﬁrst. We must
have reached the Ford by the twentieth.’
‘You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,’ said
Gandalf. ‘How do the side and shoulder feel now?’
‘I don’t know,’ Frodo answered. ‘They don’t feel at all: which is
an improvement, but’ – he made an effort – ‘I can move my arm
again a little. Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,’ he added,
touching his left hand with his right.
‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘It is mending fast. You will soon be sound
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since
you were brought in.’
‘Days?’ said Frodo.
‘Well, four nights and three days, to be exact. The Elves brought
you from the Ford on the night of the twentieth, and that is where
you lost count. We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has hardly
left your side, day or night, except to run messages. Elrond is a master
of healing, but the weapons of our Enemy are deadly. To tell you
the truth, I had very little hope; for I suspected that there was some
fragment of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be
found until last night. Then Elrond removed a splinter. It was deeply
buried, and it was working inwards.’

222

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife with notched
blade that had vanished in Strider’s hands. ‘Don’t be alarmed!’ said
Gandalf. ‘It is gone now. It has been melted. And it seems that
Hobbits fade very reluctantly. I have known strong warriors of the
Big People who would quickly have been overcome by that splinter,
which you bore for seventeen days.’
‘What would they have done to me?’ asked Frodo. ‘What were
the Riders trying to do?’
‘They tried to pierce your heart with a Morgul-knife which remains
in the wound. If they had succeeded, you would have become like
they are, only weaker and under their command. You would have
become a wraith under the dominion of the Dark Lord; and he would
have tormented you for trying to keep his Ring, if any greater torment
were possible than being robbed of it and seeing it on his hand.’
‘Thank goodness I did not realize the horrible danger!’ said Frodo
faintly. ‘I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had known more, I
should not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!’
‘Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,’ said Gandalf, ‘not to mention courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder
was pierced; and that was because you resisted to the last. But it was
a terribly narrow shave, so to speak. You were in gravest peril while
you wore the Ring, for then you were half in the wraith-world yourself,
and they might have seized you. You could see them, and they could
see you.’
‘I know,’ said Frodo. ‘They were terrible to behold! But why could
we all see their horses?’
‘Because they are real horses; just as the black robes are real robes
that they wear to give shape to their nothingness when they have
dealings with the living.’
‘Then why do these black horses endure such riders? All other
animals are terriﬁed when they draw near, even the elf-horse of
Glorﬁndel. The dogs howl and the geese scream at them.’
‘Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark
Lord in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There
are orcs and trolls, there are wargs and werewolves; and there have
been and still are many Men, warriors and kings, that walk alive
under the Sun, and yet are under his sway. And their number is
growing daily.’
‘What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?’
‘Yes, at present, until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear
the Dark Lord, and they may ﬂy before him, but never again will
they listen to him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live still
some of his chief foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond
the furthest seas. They do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who

MANY MEETINGS

223

have dwelt in the Blessed Realm live at once in both worlds, and
against both the Seen and the Unseen they have great power.’
‘I thought that I saw a white ﬁgure that shone and did not grow
dim like the others. Was that Glorﬁndel then?’
‘Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one
of the mighty of the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord of a house of princes.
Indeed there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of
Mordor, for a while: and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There
is power, too, of another kind in the Shire. But all such places will
soon become islands under siege, if things go on as they are going.
The Dark Lord is putting forth all his strength.
‘Still,’ he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin,
while his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, ‘we must
keep up our courage. You will soon be well, if I do not talk you to
death. You are in Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything
for the present.’
‘I haven’t any courage to keep up,’ said Frodo, ‘but I am not
worried at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me
the end of the affair at the Ford, as I keep on asking, and I shall be
content for the present. After that I shall have another sleep, I think;
but I shan’t be able to close my eyes until you have ﬁnished the story
for me.’
Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside and took a good look at
Frodo. The colour had come back to his face, and his eyes were
clear, and fully awake and aware. He was smiling, and there seemed
to be little wrong with him. But to the wizard’s eye there was a faint
change, just a hint as it were of transparency, about him, and especially about the left hand that lay outside upon the coverlet.
‘Still that must be expected,’ said Gandalf to himself. ‘He is not
half through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond
can foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass ﬁlled
with a clear light for eyes to see that can.’
‘You look splendid,’ he said aloud. ‘I will risk a brief tale without
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must
sleep again. This is what happened, as far as I can gather. The Riders
made straight for you, as soon as you ﬂed. They did not need the
guidance of their horses any longer: you had become visible to them,
being already on the threshold of their world. And also the Ring drew
them. Your friends sprang aside, off the road, or they would have
been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save you, if the
white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, and
too many to oppose. On foot even Glorﬁndel and Aragorn together
could not withstand all the Nine at once.
‘When the Ringwraiths swept by, your friends ran up behind.

224

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Close to the Ford there is a small hollow beside the road masked by
a few stunted trees. There they hastily kindled ﬁre; for Glorﬁndel
knew that a ﬂood would come down, if the Riders tried to cross, and
then he would have to deal with any that were left on his side of the
river. The moment the ﬂood appeared, he rushed out, followed by
Aragorn and the others with ﬂaming brands. Caught between ﬁre
and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in his wrath, they were
dismayed, and their horses were stricken with madness. Three were
carried away by the ﬁrst assault of the ﬂood; the others were now
hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.’
‘And is that the end of the Black Riders?’ asked Frodo.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Their horses must have perished, and without
them they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths themselves cannot be so
easily destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at
present. Your friends crossed after the ﬂood had passed and they found
you lying on your face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword under
you. The horse was standing guard beside you. You were pale and cold,
and they feared that you were dead, or worse. Elrond’s folk met them,
carrying you slowly towards Rivendell.’
‘Who made the ﬂood?’ asked Frodo.
‘Elrond commanded it,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The river of this valley
is under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need
to bar the Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into
the water the ﬂood was released. If I may say so, I added a few
touches of my own: you may not have noticed, but some of the waves
took the form of great white horses with shining white riders; and
there were many rolling and grinding boulders. For a moment I was
afraid that we had let loose too ﬁerce a wrath, and the ﬂood would
get out of hand and wash you all away. There is great vigour in the
waters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains.’
‘Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: ‘the tremendous
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and
all. But now we are safe!’
Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. ‘Yes,
you are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will
all be there in places of honour.’
‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorﬁndel
and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much
trouble and show me so much kindness.’
‘Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said Gandalf,
smiling. ‘I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the
Ring-bearer. And you are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-ﬁnder.’
‘Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. ‘I wonder where he is. I wish he

MANY MEETINGS

225

was here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh.
The cow jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!’ With that
he fell fast asleep.
Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea.
That house was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, ‘a perfect house,
whether you like food or sleep or story-telling or singing, or just
sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all’. Merely
to be there was a cure for weariness, fear, and sadness.
As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he found that
he no longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food
and drink, and probably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He
got out of bed and discovered that his arm was already nearly as
useful again as it ever had been. He found laid ready clean garments
of green cloth that ﬁtted him excellently. Looking in a mirror he
was startled to see a much thinner reﬂection of himself than he
remembered: it looked remarkably like the young nephew of Bilbo
who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire; but the eyes
looked out at him thoughtfully.
‘Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a
looking-glass,’ he said to his reﬂection. ‘But now for a merry meeting!’
He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune.
At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came
in. He ran to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He
stroked it gently and then he blushed and turned hastily away.
‘Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo.
‘It’s warm!’ said Sam. ‘Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt
so cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried,
turning round again with shining eyes and dancing on the ﬂoor. ‘It’s
ﬁne to see you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come
and see if you were ready to come down, and I thought he was
joking.’
‘I am ready,’ said Frodo. ‘Let’s go and look for the rest of the
party!’
‘I can take you to them, sir,’ said Sam. ‘It’s a big house this, and
very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what
you’ll ﬁnd round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there!
Some like kings, terrible and splendid; and some as merry as children.
And the music and the singing – not that I have had the time or the
heart for much listening since we got here. But I’m getting to know
some of the ways of the place.’
‘I know what you have been doing, Sam,’ said Frodo, taking his
arm. ‘But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart’s
content. Come on, guide me round the corners!’

226

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out
into a high garden above the steep bank of the river. He found his
friends sitting in a porch on the side of the house looking east.
Shadows had fallen in the valley below, but there was still a light on
the faces of the mountains far above. The air was warm. The sound
of running and falling water was loud, and the evening was ﬁlled
with a faint scent of trees and ﬂowers, as if summer still lingered in
Elrond’s gardens.
‘Hurray!’ cried Pippin, springing up. ‘Here is our noble cousin!
Make way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!’
‘Hush!’ said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch.
‘Evil things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should
not name them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master
of the Dark Tower of Mordor, whose power is again stretching out
over the world. We are sitting in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’
‘Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ said
Pippin. ‘He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible,
somehow, to feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could
sing, if I knew the right song for the occasion.’
‘I feel like singing myself,’ laughed Frodo. ‘Though at the moment
I feel more like eating and drinking.’
‘That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. ‘You have shown your
usual cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.’
‘More than a meal! A feast!’ said Merry. ‘As soon as Gandalf
reported that you were recovered, the preparations began.’ He had
hardly ﬁnished speaking when they were summoned to the hall by
the ringing of many bells.
The hall of Elrond’s house was ﬁlled with folk: Elves for the most
part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was
his custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the
dais; and next to him on the one side sat Glorﬁndel, on the other
side sat Gandalf.
Frodo looked at them in wonder; for he had never before seen
Elrond, of whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right
hand and his left, Glorﬁndel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought
he knew so well, were revealed as lords of dignity and power.
Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other two; but his long
white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broad shoulders, made
him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his aged face under
great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could leap
suddenly into ﬁre.
Glorﬁndel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his
face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright

MANY MEETINGS

227

and keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and in
his hand was strength.
The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in
it was written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful.
His hair was dark as the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a
circlet of silver; his eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them
was a light like the light of stars. Venerable he seemed as a king
crowned with many winters, and yet hale as a tried warrior in the
fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of Rivendell and mighty
among both Elves and Men.
In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon the wall,
there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look
upon, and so like was she in form of womanhood to Elrond that
Frodo guessed that she was one of his close kindred. Young she was
and yet not so. The braids of her dark hair were touched by no frost;
her white arms and clear face were ﬂawless and smooth, and the light
of stars was in her bright eyes, grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly
she looked, and thought and knowledge were in her glance, as of one
who has known many things that the years bring. Above her brow
her head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted with small gems,
glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament save a
girdle of leaves wrought in silver.
So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen;
Arwen, daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that the likeness of
Lúthien had come on earth again; and she was called Undómiel, for
she was the Evenstar of her people. Long she had been in the land
of her mother’s kin, in Lórien beyond the mountains, and was but
lately returned to Rivendell to her father’s house. But her brothers,
Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon errantry; for they rode often far
aﬁeld with the Rangers of the North, forgetting never their mother’s
torment in the dens of the orcs.
Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to ﬁnd
that he had a seat at Elrond’s table among all these folk so high and
fair. Though he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several
cushions, he felt very small, and rather out of place; but that feeling
quickly passed. The feast was merry and the food all that his hunger
could desire. It was some time before he looked about him again or
even turned to his neighbours.
He looked ﬁrst for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to
wait on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a
guest of honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and
Merry at the upper end of one of the side-tables close to the dais.
He could see no sign of Strider.

228

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Next to Frodo on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance,
richly dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was white, nearly as
white as the snow-white cloth of his garments. He wore a silver belt,
and round his neck hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo
stopped eating to look at him.
‘Welcome and well met!’ said the dwarf, turning towards him.
Then he actually rose from his seat and bowed. ‘Glóin at your service,’
he said, and bowed still lower.
‘Frodo Baggins at your service and your family’s,’ said Frodo
correctly, rising in surprise and scattering his cushions. ‘Am I right
in guessing that you are the Glóin, one of the twelve companions of
the great Thorin Oakenshield?’
‘Quite right,’ answered the dwarf, gathering up the cushions and
courteously assisting Frodo back into his seat. ‘And I do not ask, for
I have already been told that you are the kinsman and adopted heir
of our friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on
your recovery.’
‘Thank you very much,’ said Frodo.
‘You have had some very strange adventures, I hear,’ said Glóin.
‘I wonder greatly what brings four hobbits on so long a journey.
Nothing like it has happened since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps
I should not inquire too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not
seem disposed to talk of this?’
‘I think we will not speak of it, at least not yet,’ said Frodo politely.
He guessed that even in Elrond’s house the matter of the Ring was
not one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his troubles
for a time. ‘But I am equally curious,’ he added, ‘to learn what brings
so important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.’
Glóin looked at him. ‘If you have not heard, I think we will not
speak yet of that either. Master Elrond will summon us all ere long,
I believe, and then we shall all hear many things. But there is much
else that may be told.’
Throughout the rest of the meal they talked together, but Frodo
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from
the Ring, seemed small and far-away and unimportant, while Glóin
had much to tell of events in the northern regions of Wilderland.
Frodo learned that Grimbeorn the Old, son of Beorn, was now the
lord of many sturdy men, and to their land between the Mountains
and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.
‘Indeed,’ said Glóin, ‘if it were not for the Beornings, the passage
from Dale to Rivendell would long ago have become impossible.
They are valiant men and keep open the High Pass and the Ford of
Carrock. But their tolls are high,’ he added with a shake of his head;
‘and like Beorn of old they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they

MANY MEETINGS

229

are trusty, and that is much in these days. Nowhere are there any
men so friendly to us as the Men of Dale. They are good folk, the
Bardings. The grandson of Bard the Bowman rules them, Brand son
of Bain son of Bard. He is a strong king, and his realm now reaches
far south and east of Esgaroth.’
‘And what of your own people?’ asked Frodo.
‘There is much to tell, good and bad,’ said Glóin; ‘yet it is mostly
good: we have so far been fortunate, though we do not escape the
shadow of these times. If you really wish to hear of us, I will tell you
tidings gladly. But stop me when you are weary! Dwarves’ tongues
run on when speaking of their handiwork, they say.’
And with that Glóin embarked on a long account of the doings
of the Dwarf-kingdom. He was delighted to have found so polite a
listener; for Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no
attempt to change the subject, though actually he soon got rather
lost among the strange names of people and places that he had never
heard of before. He was interested, however, to hear that Dáin was
still King under the Mountain, and was now old (having passed his
two hundred and ﬁftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. Of
the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies seven
were still with him: Dwalin, Glóin, Dori, Nori, Bifur, Bofur, and
Bombur. Bombur was now so fat that he could not move himself
from his couch to his chair at table, and it took six young dwarves
to lift him.
´
‘And what has become of Balin and Ori and Oin?’
asked Frodo.
A shadow passed over Glóin’s face. ‘We do not know,’ he
answered. ‘It is largely on account of Balin that I have come to ask
the advice of those that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak
of merrier things!’
Glóin began then to talk of the works of his people, telling Frodo
about their great labours in Dale and under the Mountain. ‘We have
done well,’ he said. ‘But in metal-work we cannot rival our fathers,
many of whose secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen
swords, but we cannot again make mail or blade to match those that
were made before the dragon came. Only in mining and building
have we surpassed the old days. You should see the waterways of
Dale, Frodo, and the fountains, and the pools! You should see the
stone-paved roads of many colours! And the halls and cavernous
streets under the earth with arches carved like trees; and the terraces
and towers upon the Mountain’s sides! Then you would see that we
have not been idle.’
‘I will come and see them, if ever I can,’ said Frodo. ‘How surprised
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of
Smaug!’

230

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Glóin looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘You were very fond of Bilbo
were you not?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ answered Frodo. ‘I would rather see him than all the towers
and palaces in the world.’
At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and
went down the hall, and the company followed them in due order.
The doors were thrown open, and they went across a wide passage
and through other doors, and came into a further hall. In it were no
tables, but a bright ﬁre was burning in a great hearth between the
carven pillars upon either side.
Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. ‘This is the Hall of
Fire,’ said the wizard. ‘Here you will hear many songs and tales – if
you can keep awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty
and quiet, and people come here who wish for peace, and thought.
There is always a ﬁre here, all the year round, but there is little other
light.’
As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him,
Elvish minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the hall ﬁlled,
and Frodo looked with delight upon the many fair faces that were
gathered together; the golden ﬁrelight played upon them and shimmered in their hair. Suddenly he noticed, not far from the further
end of the ﬁre, a small dark ﬁgure seated on a stool with his back
propped against a pillar. Beside him on the ground was a drinking-cup
and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was ill (if people were
ever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable to come to the feast. His
head seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his dark cloak
was drawn over his face.
Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent ﬁgure. ‘Awake,
little master!’ he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he
beckoned to him. ‘Now at last the hour has come that you have
wished for, Frodo,’ he said. ‘Here is a friend that you have long
missed.’
The dark ﬁgure raised its head and uncovered its face.
‘Bilbo!’ cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang
forward.
‘Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. ‘So you have got here at last.
I hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in
your honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself ?’
‘Why weren’t you there?’ cried Frodo. ‘And why haven’t I been
allowed to see you before?’
‘Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have
sat by your side with Sam each day. But as for the feast, I don’t go
in for such things much now. And I had something else to do.’

MANY MEETINGS

231

‘What were you doing?’
‘Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and this
is the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ he said,
cocking an eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinkle in it and no
sign of sleepiness that Frodo could see. ‘Wake up! I was not asleep,
Master Elrond. If you want to know, you have all come out from
your feast too soon, and you have disturbed me – in the middle of
making up a song. I was stuck over a line or two, and was thinking
about them; but now I don’t suppose I shall ever get them right.
There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be driven clean
out of my head. I shall have to get my friend the Dúnadan to help
me. Where is he?’
Elrond laughed. ‘He shall be found,’ he said. ‘Then you two shall
go into a corner and ﬁnish your task, and we will hear it and judge
it before we end our merrymaking.’ Messengers were sent to ﬁnd
Bilbo’s friend, though none knew where he was, or why he had not
been present at the feast.
In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came
quickly and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft
voices, oblivious of the mirth and music in the hall about them.
Bilbo had not much to say of himself. When he had left Hobbiton
he had wandered off aimlessly, along the Road or in the country
on either side; but somehow he had steered all the time towards
Rivendell.
‘I got here without much adventure,’ he said, ‘and after a rest I
went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan’t travel
again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here
I have been. I have done this and that. I have written some more of
my book. And, of course, I make up a few songs. They sing them
occasionally: just to please me, I think; for, of course, they aren’t
really good enough for Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time
doesn’t seem to pass here: it just is. A remarkable place altogether.
‘I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and out of the
South, but hardly anything from the Shire. I heard about the Ring,
of course. Gandalf has been here often. Not that he has told me a
great deal, he has become closer than ever these last few years. The
Dúnadan has told me more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a
disturbance! It is a pity that Gandalf did not ﬁnd out more sooner.
I could have brought the thing here myself long ago without so much
trouble. I have thought several times of going back to Hobbiton for
it; but I am getting old, and they would not let me: Gandalf and
Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the Enemy was looking
high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught
me tottering about in the Wild.

232

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘And Gandalf said: ‘‘The Ring has passed on, Bilbo. It would do
no good to you or to others, if you tried to meddle with it again.’’
Odd sort of remark, just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking
after you, so I let things be. I am frightfully glad to see you safe and
sound.’ He paused and looked at Frodo doubtfully.
‘Have you got it here?’ he asked in a whisper. ‘I can’t help feeling
curious, you know, after all I’ve heard. I should very much like just
to peep at it again.’
‘Yes, I’ve got it,’ answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. ‘It
looks just the same as ever it did.’
‘Well, I should just like to see it for a moment,’ said Bilbo.
When he had dressed, Frodo found that while he slept the Ring
had been hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong.
Slowly he drew it out. Bilbo put out his hand. But Frodo quickly
drew back the Ring. To his distress and amazement he found that
he was no longer looking at Bilbo; a shadow seemed to have fallen
between them, and through it he found himself eyeing a little wrinkled
creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands. He felt a desire
to strike him.
The music and singing round them seemed to falter, and a silence
fell. Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo’s face and passed his hand across
his eyes. ‘I understand now,’ he said. ‘Put it away! I am sorry: sorry
you have come in for this burden; sorry about everything. Don’t
adventures ever have an end? I suppose not. Someone else always
has to carry on the story. Well, it can’t be helped. I wonder if it’s
any good trying to ﬁnish my book? But don’t let’s worry about it
now – let’s have some real News! Tell me all about the Shire!’
Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly
a shred of memory. The light and music of Rivendell was about him
again. Bilbo smiled and laughed happily. Every item of news from
the Shire that Frodo could tell – aided and corrected now and again
by Sam – was of the greatest interest to him, from the felling of the
least tree to the pranks of the smallest child in Hobbiton. They were
so deep in the doings of the Four Farthings that they did not notice
the arrival of a man clad in dark green cloth. For many minutes he
stood looking down at them with a smile.
Suddenly Bilbo looked up. ‘Ah, there you are at last, Dúnadan!’
he cried.
‘Strider!’ said Frodo. ‘You seem to have a lot of names.’
‘Well, Strider is one that I haven’t heard before, anyway,’ said
Bilbo. ‘What do you call him that for?’
‘They call me that in Bree,’ said Strider laughing, ‘and that is how
I was introduced to him.’

238

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

of regret as they passed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped
over the threshold a single clear voice rose in song.
A Elbereth Gilthoniel,
silivren penna mı́riel
o menel aglar elenath!
Na-chaered palan-dı́riel
o galadhremmin ennorath,
Fanuilos, le linnathon
nef aear, sı́ nef aearon!
Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in his chair
and the ﬁre was on his face like summer-light upon the trees. Near
him sat the Lady Arwen. To his surprise Frodo saw that Aragorn
stood beside her; his dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed to
be clad in elven-mail, and a star shone on his breast. They spoke
together, and then suddenly it seemed to Frodo that Arwen turned
towards him, and the light of her eyes fell on him from afar and
pierced his heart.
He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the Elvish
song fell like clear jewels of blended word and melody. ‘It is a song
to Elbereth,’ said Bilbo. ‘They will sing that, and other songs of the
Blessed Realm, many times tonight. Come on!’
He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the
gardens and looked south across the ravine of the Bruinen. There
they sat for some while, looking through the window at the bright
stars above the steep-climbing woods, and talking softly. They spoke
no more of the small news of the Shire far away, nor of the dark
shadows and perils that encompassed them, but of the fair things
they had seen in the world together, of the Elves, of the stars, of
trees, and the gentle fall of the bright year in the woods.
At last there came a knock on the door. ‘Begging your pardon,’
said Sam, putting in his head, ‘but I was just wondering if you would
be wanting anything.’
‘And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,’ replied Bilbo. ‘I guess you
mean that it is time your master went to bed.’
‘Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear, and he only
got up today for the ﬁrst time.’
‘Quite right, Sam,’ laughed Bilbo. ‘You can trot off and tell Gandalf
that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been
good to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real
good talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should live
to see your chapters of our story. Good night! I’ll take a walk, I think,
and look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!’

Chapter 2
THE COUNCIL OF ELROND
Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked
along the terraces above the loud-ﬂowing Bruinen and watched the
pale, cool sun rise above the far mountains, and shine down, slanting
through the thin silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was
glimmering, and the woven nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush.
Sam walked beside him, saying nothing, but snifﬁng the air, and
looking every now and again with wonder in his eyes at the great
heights in the East. The snow was white upon their peaks.
On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they came
upon Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. ‘Hullo! Good morning!’ said
Bilbo. ‘Feel ready for the great council?’
‘I feel ready for anything,’ answered Frodo. ‘But most of all I
should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like
to get into those pine-woods up there.’ He pointed away far up the
side of Rivendell to the north.
‘You may have a chance later,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we cannot make
any plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.’
Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. ‘That
is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,’ cried Gandalf. ‘Come
along now! Both you and Bilbo are wanted.’
Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding
path back to the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment
forgotten, trotted Sam.
Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends
the evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now
glowing in the valley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from
the foaming river-bed. Birds were singing, and a wholesome peace
lay on the land. To Frodo his dangerous ﬂight, and the rumours of
the darkness growing in the world outside, already seemed only the
memories of a troubled dream; but the faces that were turned to
meet them as they entered were grave.
Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence about
him. Frodo saw Glorﬁndel and Glóin; and in a corner alone Strider
was sitting, clad in his old travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew
Frodo to a seat by his side, and presented him to the company,
saying:
‘Here, my friends, is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

247

‘Then it belongs to you, and not to me at all!’ cried Frodo in
amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected the Ring to be
demanded at once.
‘It does not belong to either of us,’ said Aragorn; ‘but it has been
ordained that you should hold it for a while.’
‘Bring out the Ring, Frodo!’ said Gandalf solemnly. ‘The time has
come. Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder
of his riddle.’
There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was
shaken by a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance
to reveal the Ring, and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far
away. The Ring gleamed and ﬂickered as he held it up before them
in his trembling hand.
‘Behold Isildur’s Bane!’ said Elrond.
Boromir’s eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. ‘The
Halﬂing!’ he muttered. ‘Is then the doom of Minas Tirith come at
last? But why then should we seek a broken sword?’
‘The words were not the doom of Minas Tirith,’ said Aragorn. ‘But
doom and great deeds are indeed at hand. For the Sword that was
Broken is the Sword of Elendil that broke beneath him when he fell.
It has been treasured by his heirs when all other heirlooms were lost;
for it was spoken of old among us that it should be made again when
the Ring, Isildur’s Bane, was found. Now you have seen the sword
that you have sought, what would you ask? Do you wish for the
House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?’
‘I was not sent to beg any boon, but to seek only the meaning of
a riddle,’ answered Boromir proudly. ‘Yet we are hard pressed, and
the Sword of Elendil would be a help beyond our hope – if such a
thing could indeed return out of the shadows of the past.’ He looked
again at Aragorn, and doubt was in his eyes.
Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was
annoyed on his friend’s behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst
out:
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a ﬁre shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken:
The crownless again shall be king.

248

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Not very good perhaps, but to the point – if you need more beyond
the word of Elrond. If that was worth a journey of a hundred and
ten days to hear, you had best listen to it.’ He sat down with a snort.
‘I made that up myself,’ he whispered to Frodo, ‘for the Dúnadan,
a long time ago when he ﬁrst told me about himself. I almost wish
that my adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when
his day comes.’
Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. ‘For my
part I forgive your doubt,’ he said. ‘Little do I resemble the ﬁgures
of Elendil and Isildur as they stand carven in their majesty in the
halls of Denethor. I am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I
have had a hard life and a long; and the leagues that lie between here
and Gondor are a small part in the count of my journeys. I have
crossed many mountains and many rivers, and trodden many plains,
even into the far countries of Rhûn and Harad where the stars are
strange.
‘But my home, such as I have, is in the North. For here the heirs
of Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto
son for many generations. Our days have darkened, and we have
dwindled; but ever the Sword has passed to a new keeper. And this
I will say to you, Boromir, ere I end. Lonely men are we, Rangers
of the wild, hunters – but hunters ever of the servants of the Enemy;
for they are found in many places, not in Mordor only.
‘If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we have played
another part. Many evil things there are that your strong walls and
bright swords do not stay. You know little of the lands beyond your
bounds. Peace and freedom, do you say? The North would have
known them little but for us. Fear would have destroyed them. But
when dark things come from the houseless hills, or creep from sunless
woods, they ﬂy from us. What roads would any dare to tread, what
safety would there be in quiet lands, or in the homes of simple men
at night, if the Dúnedain were asleep, or were all gone into the grave?
‘And yet less thanks have we than you. Travellers scowl at us, and
countrymen give us scornful names. ‘‘Strider’’ I am to one fat man
who lives within a day’s march of foes that would freeze his heart,
or lay his little town in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly. Yet
we would not have it otherwise. If simple folk are free from care and
fear, simple they will be, and we must be secret to keep them so.
That has been the task of my kindred, while the years have lengthened
and the grass has grown.
‘But now the world is changing once again. A new hour comes.
Isildur’s Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword shall be reforged.
I will come to Minas Tirith.’
‘Isildur’s Bane is found, you say,’ said Boromir. ‘I have seen a

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

249

bright ring in the Halﬂing’s hand; but Isildur perished ere this age
of the world began, they say. How do the Wise know that this ring
is his? And how has it passed down the years, until it is brought
hither by so strange a messenger?’
‘That shall be told,’ said Elrond.
‘But not yet, I beg, Master!’ cried Bilbo. ‘Already the Sun is climbing to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.’
‘I had not named you,’ said Elrond smiling. ‘But I do so now.
Come! Tell us your tale. And if you have not yet cast your story into
verse, you may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall
you be refreshed.’
‘Very well,’ said Bilbo. ‘I will do as you bid. But I will now tell
the true story, and if some here have heard me tell it otherwise’ – he
looked sidelong at Glóin – ‘I ask them to forget it and forgive me. I
only wished to claim the treasure as my very own in those days, and
to be rid of the name of thief that was put on me. But perhaps I
understand things a little better now. Anyway, this is what happened.’
To some there Bilbo’s tale was wholly new, and they listened
with amazement while the old hobbit, actually not at all displeased,
recounted his adventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit
a single riddle. He would have given also an account of his party and
disappearance from the Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond
raised his hand.
‘Well told, my friend,’ he said, ‘but that is enough at this time.
For the moment it sufﬁces to know that the Ring passed to Frodo,
your heir. Let him now speak!’
Then, less willingly than Bilbo, Frodo told of all his dealings with
the Ring from the day that it passed into his keeping. Every step of
his journey from Hobbiton to the Ford of Bruinen was questioned
and considered, and everything that he could recall concerning the
Black Riders was examined. At last he sat down again.
‘Not bad,’ Bilbo said to him. ‘You would have made a good story
of it, if they hadn’t kept on interrupting. I tried to make a few notes,
but we shall have to go over it all again together some time, if I am
to write it up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got
here!’
‘Yes, it made quite a long tale,’ answered Frodo. ‘But the story
still does not seem complete to me. I still want to know a good deal,
especially about Gandalf.’
Galdor of the Havens, who sat nearby, overheard him. ‘You speak
for me also,’ he cried, and turning to Elrond he said: ‘The Wise may
have good reason to believe that the halﬂing’s trove is indeed the

250

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Great Ring of long debate, unlikely though that may seem to those
who know less. But may we not hear the proofs? And I would ask
this also. What of Saruman? He is learned in the lore of the Rings,
yet he is not among us. What is his counsel – if he knows the things
that we have heard?’
‘The questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,’ said
Elrond. ‘I had not overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But
these things it is the part of Gandalf to make clear; and I call upon
him last, for it is the place of honour, and in all this matter he has
been the chief.’
‘Some, Galdor,’ said Gandalf, ‘would think the tidings of Glóin,
and the pursuit of Frodo, proof enough that the halﬂing’s trove is a
thing of great worth to the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The
Nine the Nazgûl keep. The Seven are taken or destroyed.’ At this
Glóin stirred, but did not speak. ‘The Three we know of. What then
is this one that he desires so much?
‘There is indeed a wide waste of time between the River and the
Mountain, between the loss and the ﬁnding. But the gap in the knowledge of the Wise has been ﬁlled at last. Yet too slowly. For the Enemy
has been close behind, closer even than I feared. And well is it that
not until this year, this very summer, as it seems, did he learn the
full truth.
‘Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to
pass the doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur, and secretly
explored his ways, and found thus that our fears were true: he was
none other than Sauron, our Enemy of old, at length taking shape
and power again. Some, too, will remember also that Saruman dissuaded us from open deeds against him, and for long we watched
him only. Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, and the
Council put forth its strength and drove the evil out of Mirkwood –
and that was in the very year of the ﬁnding of this Ring: a strange
chance, if chance it was.
‘But we were too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron also had watched
us, and had long prepared against our stroke, governing Mordor from
afar through Minas Morgul, where his Nine servants dwelt, until all
was ready. Then he gave way before us, but only feigned to ﬂee, and
soon after came to the Dark Tower and openly declared himself.
Then for the last time the Council met; for now we learned that he
was seeking ever more eagerly for the One. We feared then that he
had some news of it that we knew nothing of. But Saruman said nay,
and repeated what he had said to us before: that the One would never
again be found in Middle-earth.
‘ ‘‘At the worst,’’ said he, ‘‘our Enemy knows that we have it not,
and that it still is lost. But what was lost may yet be found, he thinks.

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

251

Fear not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this
matter? Into Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago, while Sauron
slept, it was rolled down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until
the End.’’ ’
Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks
of the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world
had so long lain hidden. He sighed.
‘There I was at fault,’ he said. ‘I was lulled by the words of
Saruman the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner,
and our peril would now be less.’
‘We were all at fault,’ said Elrond, ‘and but for your vigilance the
Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!’
‘From the ﬁrst my heart misgave me, against all reason that I
knew,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I desired to know how this thing came to
Gollum, and how long he had possessed it. So I set a watch for him,
guessing that he would ere long come forth from his darkness to seek
for his treasure. He came, but he escaped and was not found. And
then alas! I let the matter rest, watching and waiting only, as we have
too often done.
‘Time passed with many cares, until my doubts were awakened
again to sudden fear. Whence came the hobbit’s ring? What, if my
fear was true, should be done with it? Those things I must decide.
But I spoke yet of my dread to none, knowing the peril of an untimely
whisper, if it went astray. In all the long wars with the Dark Tower
treason has ever been our greatest foe.
‘That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware that spies of
many sorts, even beasts and birds, were gathered round the Shire,
and my fear grew. I called for the help of the Dúnedain, and their
watch was doubled; and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of
Isildur.’
‘And I,’ said Aragorn, ‘counselled that we should hunt for Gollum,
too late though it may seem. And since it seemed ﬁt that Isildur’s
heir should labour to repair Isildur’s fault, I went with Gandalf on
the long and hopeless search.’
Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of
Wilderland, down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences
of Mordor. ‘There we had rumour of him, and we guess that he
dwelt there long in the dark hills; but we never found him, and at
last I despaired. And then in my despair I thought again of a test
that might make the ﬁnding of Gollum unneeded. The ring itself
might tell if it were the One. The memory of words at the Council
came back to me: words of Saruman, half-heeded at the time. I heard
them now clearly in my heart.

252

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘ ‘‘The Nine, the Seven, and the Three,’’ he said, ‘‘had each their
proper gem. Not so the One. It was round and unadorned, as it were
one of the lesser rings; but its maker set marks upon it that the skilled,
maybe, could still see and read.’’
‘What those marks were he had not said. Who now would know?
The maker. And Saruman? But great though his lore may be, it must
have a source. What hand save Sauron’s ever held this thing, ere it
was lost? The hand of Isildur alone.
‘With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly to
Gondor. In former days the members of my order had been well
received there, but Saruman most of all. Often he had been for long
the guest of the Lords of the City. Less welcome did the Lord
Denethor show me then than of old, and grudgingly he permitted
me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books.
‘ ‘‘If indeed you look only, as you say, for records of ancient days,
and the beginnings of the City, read on!’’ he said. ‘‘For to me what
was is less dark than what is to come, and that is my care. But unless
you have more skill even than Saruman, who has studied here long,
you will ﬁnd naught that is not well known to me, who am master
of the lore of this City.’’
‘So said Denethor. And yet there lie in his hoards many records
that few even of the lore-masters now can read, for their scripts and
tongues have become dark to later men. And Boromir, there lies in
Minas Tirith still, unread, I guess, by any save Saruman and myself
since the kings failed, a scroll that Isildur made himself. For Isildur
did not march away straight from the war in Mordor, as some have
told the tale.’
‘Some in the North, maybe,’ Boromir broke in. ‘All know in
Gondor that he went ﬁrst to Minas Anor and dwelt a while with his
nephew Meneldil, instructing him, before he committed to him the
rule of the South Kingdom. In that time he planted there the last
sapling of the White Tree in memory of his brother.’
‘But in that time also he made this scroll,’ said Gandalf; ‘and that
is not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns
the Ring, and thus wrote Isildur therein:
The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom;
but records of it shall be left in Gondor, where also dwell the heirs of Elendil,
lest a time come when the memory of these great matters shall grow dim.
‘And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as he found it.
It was hot when I ﬁrst took it, hot as a glede, and my hand was
scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain of it. Yet

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

253

even as I write it is cooled, and it seemeth to shrink, though it loseth neither
its beauty nor its shape. Already the writing upon it, which at ﬁrst was
as clear as red ﬂame, fadeth and is now only barely to be read. It is
fashioned in an elven-script of Eregion, for they have no letters in Mordor
for such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to be
a tongue of the Black Land, since it is foul and uncouth. What evil it
saith I do not know; but I trace here a copy of it, lest it fade beyond recall.
The Ring misseth, maybe, the heat of Sauron’s hand, which was black
and yet burned like ﬁre, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were
the gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed. But for my part
I will risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works of Sauron the only fair.
It is precious to me, though I buy it with great pain.
‘When I read these words, my quest was ended. For the traced
writing was indeed as Isildur guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and
the servants of the Tower. And what was said therein was already
known. For in the day that Sauron ﬁrst put on the One, Celebrimbor,
maker of the Three, was aware of him, and from afar he heard him
speak these words, and so his evil purposes were revealed.
‘At once I took my leave of Denethor, but even as I went northwards, messages came to me out of Lórien that Aragorn had passed
that way, and that he had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went ﬁrst to meet him and hear his tale. Into what deadly perils
he had gone alone I dared not guess.’
‘There is little need to tell of them,’ said Aragorn. ‘If a man must
needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly ﬂowers of
Morgul Vale, then perils he will have. I, too, despaired at last, and
I began my homeward journey. And then, by fortune, I came suddenly on what I sought: the marks of soft feet beside a muddy pool.
But now the trail was fresh and swift, and it led not to Mordor but
away. Along the skirts of the Dead Marshes I followed it, and then
I had him. Lurking by a stagnant mere, peering in the water as the
dark eve fell, I caught him, Gollum. He was covered with green slime.
He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and I was not gentle.
Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than the marks of his
teeth. I deemed it the worst part of all my journey, the road back,
watching him day and night, making him walk before me with a
halter on his neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and
food, driving him ever towards Mirkwood. I brought him there at
last and gave him to the Elves, for we had agreed that this should be
done; and I was glad to be rid of his company, for he stank. For my
part I hope never to look upon him again; but Gandalf came and
endured long speech with him.’
‘Yes, long and weary,’ said Gandalf, ‘but not without proﬁt. For

254

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

one thing, the tale he told of his loss agreed with that which Bilbo
has now told openly for the ﬁrst time; but that mattered little, since
I had already guessed it. But I learned then ﬁrst that Gollum’s ring
came out of the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned
also that he had possessed it long. Many lives of his small kind. The
power of the ring had lengthened his years far beyond their span;
but that power only the Great Rings wield.
‘And if that is not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other test
that I spoke of. Upon this very ring which you have here seen held
aloft, round and unadorned, the letters that Isildur reported may still
be read, if one has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the
ﬁre a while. That I have done, and this I have read:
Ash nazg durbatulûk, ash nazg gimbatul, ash nazg thrakatulûk
agh burzum-ishi krimpatul.’
The change in the wizard’s voice was astounding. Suddenly it
became menacing, powerful, harsh as stone. A shadow seemed to
pass over the high sun, and the porch for a moment grew dark. All
trembled, and the Elves stopped their ears.
‘Never before has any voice dared to utter words of that tongue
in Imladris, Gandalf the Grey,’ said Elrond, as the shadow passed
and the company breathed once more.
‘And let us hope that none will ever speak it here again,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘Nonetheless I do not ask your pardon, Master Elrond. For
if that tongue is not soon to be heard in every corner of the West,
then let all put doubt aside that this thing is indeed what the Wise
have declared: the treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice;
and in it lies a great part of his strength of old. Out of the Black
Years come the words that the Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew
that they had been betrayed:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them, One Ring to
bring them all and in the Darkness bind them.
‘Know also, my friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum. He
was loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but it is beyond all doubt
that he went to Mordor, and there all that he knew was forced from
him. Thus the Enemy knows now that the One is found, that it was
long in the Shire; and since his servants have pursued it almost to
our door, he soon will know, already he may know, even as I speak,
that we have it here.’
*
*
*

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

255

All sat silent for a while, until at length Boromir spoke. ‘He is a
small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What
became of him? To what doom did you put him?’
‘He is in prison, but no worse,’ said Aragorn. ‘He had suffered
much. There is no doubt that he was tormented, and the fear of
Sauron lies black on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely
kept by the watchful Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and
gives him a strength hardly to be believed in one so lean and withered.
He could work much mischief still, if he were free. And I do not
doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some evil errand.’
‘Alas! alas!’ cried Legolas, and in his fair Elvish face there was
great distress. ‘The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told.
They are not good, but only here have I learned how evil they may
seem to this company. Sméagol, who is now called Gollum, has
escaped.’
‘Escaped?’ cried Aragorn. ‘That is ill news indeed. We shall all
rue it bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their
trust?’
‘Not through lack of watchfulness,’ said Legolas; ‘but perhaps
through over-kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from
others, and that more is known of our doings than we could wish.
We guarded this creature day and night, at Gandalf ’s bidding, much
though we wearied of the task. But Gandalf bade us hope still for
his cure, and we had not the heart to keep him ever in dungeons
under the earth, where he would fall back into his old black
thoughts.’
‘You were less tender to me,’ said Glóin with a ﬂash of his eyes,
as old memories were stirred of his imprisonment in the deep places
of the Elven-king’s halls.
‘Now come!’ said Gandalf. ‘Pray, do not interrupt, my good Glóin.
That was a regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the
grievances that stand between Elves and Dwarves are to be brought
up here, we may as well abandon this Council.’
Glóin rose and bowed, and Legolas continued. ‘In the days of fair
weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there was a high tree
standing alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we
let him mount up to the highest branches, until he felt the free wind;
but we set a guard at the tree’s foot. One day he refused to come
down, and the guards had no mind to climb after him: he had learned
the trick of clinging to boughs with his feet as well as with his hands;
so they sat by the tree far into the night.
‘It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that
Orcs came on us at unawares. We drove them off after some time;
they were many and ﬁerce, but they came from over the mountains,

256

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and were unused to the woods. When the battle was over, we found
that Gollum was gone, and his guards were slain or taken. It then
seemed plain to us that the attack had been made for his rescue, and
that he knew of it beforehand. How that was contrived we cannot
guess; but Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy are many.
The dark things that were driven out in the year of the Dragon’s fall
have returned in greater numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil
place, save where our realm is maintained.
‘We have failed to recapture Gollum. We came on his trail among
those of many Orcs, and it plunged deep into the Forest, going south.
But ere long it escaped our skill, and we dared not continue the hunt;
for we were drawing nigh to Dol Guldur, and that is still a very evil
place; we do not go that way.’
‘Well, well, he is gone,’ said Gandalf. ‘We have no time to seek
for him again. He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet
that neither he nor Sauron have foreseen.
‘And now I will answer Galdor’s other questions. What of
Saruman? What are his counsels to us in this need? This tale I must
tell in full, for only Elrond has heard it yet, and that in brief; but it
will bear on all that we must resolve. It is the last chapter in the Tale
of the Ring, so far as it has yet gone.
‘At the end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety was
on my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the little land;
for I had a foreboding of some danger, still hidden from me but
drawing near. There messages reached me telling me of war and
defeat in Gondor, and when I heard of the Black Shadow a chill
smote my heart. But I found nothing save a few fugitives from the
South; yet it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of which they
would not speak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along
the Greenway; and not far from Bree I came upon a traveller sitting
on a bank beside the road with his grazing horse beside him. It was
Radagast the Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel, near the
borders of Mirkwood. He is one of my order, but I had not seen him
for many a year.
‘ ‘‘Gandalf !’’ he cried. ‘‘I was seeking you. But I am a stranger in
these parts. All I knew was that you might be found in a wild region
with the uncouth name of Shire.’’
‘ ‘‘Your information was correct,’’ I said. ‘‘But do not put it that
way, if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the borders of
the Shire now. And what do you want with me? It must be pressing.
You were never a traveller, unless driven by great need.’’
‘ ‘‘I have an urgent errand,’’ he said. ‘‘My news is evil.’’ Then he
looked about him, as if the hedges might have ears. ‘‘Nazgûl,’’ he

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

257

whispered. ‘‘The Nine are abroad again. They have crossed the River
secretly and are moving westward. They have taken the guise of riders
in black.’’
‘I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it.
‘ ‘‘The Enemy must have some great need or purpose,’’ said Radagast; ‘‘but what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate
parts, I cannot guess.’’
‘ ‘‘What do you mean?’’ said I.
‘ ‘‘I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news
of a land called Shire.’’
‘ ‘‘The Shire,’’ I said; but my heart sank. For even the Wise might
fear to withstand the Nine, when they are gathered together under
their fell chieftain. A great king and sorcerer he was of old, and now
he wields a deadly fear. ‘‘Who told you, and who sent you?’’ I asked.
‘ ‘‘Saruman the White,’’ answered Radagast. ‘‘And he told me to
say that if you feel the need, he will help; but you must seek his aid
at once, or it will be too late.’’
‘And that message brought me hope. For Saruman the White is
the greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a worthy Wizard, a
master of shapes and changes of hue; and he has much lore of herbs
and beasts, and birds are especially his friends. But Saruman has
long studied the arts of the Enemy himself, and thus we have often
been able to forestall him. It was by the devices of Saruman that we
drove him from Dol Guldur. It might be that he had found some
weapons that would drive back the Nine.
‘ ‘‘I will go to Saruman,’’ I said.
‘ ‘‘Then you must go now,’’ said Radagast; ‘‘for I have wasted time
in looking for you, and the days are running short. I was told to ﬁnd
you before Midsummer, and that is now here. Even if you set out
from this spot, you will hardly reach him before the Nine discover
the land that they seek. I myself shall turn back at once.’’ And with
that he mounted and would have ridden straight off.
‘ ‘‘Stay a moment!’’ I said. ‘‘We shall need your help, and the help
of all things that will give it. Send out messages to all the beasts and
birds that are your friends. Tell them to bring news of anything that
bears on this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent
to Orthanc.’’
‘ ‘‘I will do that,’’ he said, and rode off as if the Nine were after
him.
‘I could not follow him then and there. I had ridden very far
already that day, and I was as weary as my horse; and I needed to
consider matters. I stayed the night in Bree, and decided that I had
no time to return to the Shire. Never did I make a greater mistake!

258

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘However, I wrote a message to Frodo, and trusted to my friend
the innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at
long last to the dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard,
in the end of the Misty Mountains, not far from the Gap of Rohan.
And Boromir will tell you that that is a great open vale that lies
between the Misty Mountains and the northmost foothills of Ered
Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. But Isengard is a circle
of sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with a wall, and in the midst
of that valley is a tower of stone called Orthanc. It was not made by
Saruman, but by the Men of Númenor long ago; and it is very tall
and has many secrets; yet it looks not to be a work of craft. It cannot
be reached save by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle
there is only one gate.
‘Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch in the wall
of rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the keepers of the gate were
on the watch for me and told me that Saruman awaited me. I rode
under the arch, and the gate closed silently behind me, and suddenly
I was afraid, though I knew no reason for it.
‘But I rode to the foot of Orthanc, and came to the stair of
Saruman; and there he met me and led me up to his high chamber.
He wore a ring on his ﬁnger.
‘ ‘‘So you have come, Gandalf,’’ he said to me gravely; but in his
eyes there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his
heart.
‘ ‘‘Yes, I have come,’’ I said. ‘‘I have come for your aid, Saruman
the White.’’ And that title seemed to anger him.
‘ ‘‘Have you indeed, Gandalf the Grey!’’ he scoffed. ‘‘For aid? It
has seldom been heard of that Gandalf the Grey sought for aid, one
so cunning and so wise, wandering about the lands, and concerning
himself in every business, whether it belongs to him or not.’’
‘I looked at him and wondered. ‘‘But if I am not deceived,’’ said
I, ‘‘things are now moving which will require the union of all our
strength.’’
‘ ‘‘That may be so,’’ he said, ‘‘but the thought is late in coming
to you. How long, I wonder, have you concealed from me, the head
of the Council, a matter of greatest import? What brings you now
from your lurking-place in the Shire?’’
‘ ‘‘The Nine have come forth again,’’ I answered. ‘‘They have
crossed the River. So Radagast said to me.’’
‘ ‘‘Radagast the Brown!’’ laughed Saruman, and he no longer concealed his scorn. ‘‘Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple!
Radagast the Fool! Yet he had just the wit to play the part that I set
him. For you have come, and that was all the purpose of my message.
And here you will stay, Gandalf the Grey, and rest from journeys.

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

259

For I am Saruman the Wise, Saruman Ring-maker, Saruman of Many
Colours!’’
‘I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white,
were not so, but were woven of all colours, and if he moved they
shimmered and changed hue so that the eye was bewildered.
‘ ‘‘I liked white better,’’ I said.
‘ ‘‘White!’’ he sneered. ‘‘It serves as a beginning. White cloth may
be dyed. The white page can be overwritten; and the white light can
be broken.’’
‘ ‘‘In which case it is no longer white,’’ said I. ‘‘And he that breaks
a thing to ﬁnd out what it is has left the path of wisdom.’’
‘ ‘‘You need not speak to me as to one of the fools that you take
for friends,’’ said he. ‘‘I have not brought you hither to be instructed
by you, but to give you a choice.’’
‘He drew himself up then and began to declaim, as if he were
making a speech long rehearsed. ‘‘The Elder Days are gone. The
Middle Days are passing. The Younger Days are beginning. The
time of the Elves is over, but our time is at hand: the world of Men,
which we must rule. But we must have power, power to order all
things as we will, for that good which only the Wise can see.
‘ ‘‘And listen, Gandalf, my old friend and helper!’’ he said, coming
near and speaking now in a softer voice. ‘‘I said we, for we it may
be, if you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old
allies and policies will not avail us at all. There is no hope left in
Elves or dying Númenor. This then is one choice before you, before
us. We may join with that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf. There
is hope that way. Its victory is at hand; and there will be rich reward
for those that aided it. As the Power grows, its proved friends will
also grow; and the Wise, such as you and I, may with patience come
at last to direct its courses, to control it. We can bide our time, we
can keep our thoughts in our hearts, deploring maybe evils done by
the way, but approving the high and ultimate purpose: Knowledge,
Rule, Order; all the things that we have so far striven in vain to
accomplish, hindered rather than helped by our weak or idle friends.
There need not be, there would not be, any real change in our designs,
only in our means.’’
‘ ‘‘Saruman,’’ I said, ‘‘I have heard speeches of this kind before,
but only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive
the ignorant. I cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary
my ears.’’
‘He looked at me sidelong, and paused a while considering. ‘‘Well,
I see that this wise course does not commend itself to you,’’ he said.
‘‘Not yet? Not if some better way can be contrived?’’
‘He came and laid his long hand on my arm. ‘‘And why not,

260

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gandalf ?’’ he whispered. ‘‘Why not? The Ruling Ring? If we could
command that, then the Power would pass to us. That is in truth
why I brought you here. For I have many eyes in my service, and I
believe that you know where this precious thing now lies. Is it not
so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what is your business
there?’’ As he said this a lust which he could not conceal shone
suddenly in his eyes.
‘ ‘‘Saruman,’’ I said, standing away from him, ‘‘only one hand at
a time can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble
to say we! But I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news
of it to you, now that I learn your mind. You were head of the
Council, but you have unmasked yourself at last. Well, the choices
are, it seems, to submit to Sauron, or to yourself. I will take neither.
Have you others to offer?’’
‘He was cold now and perilous. ‘‘Yes,’’ he said. ‘‘I did not expect
you to show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but I gave you the
chance of aiding me willingly, and so saving yourself much trouble
and pain. The third choice is to stay here, until the end.’’
‘ ‘‘Until what end?’’
‘ ‘‘Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may ﬁnd
means to persuade you. Or until it is found in your despite, and the
Ruler has time to turn to lighter matters: to devise, say, a ﬁtting
reward for the hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey.’’
‘ ‘‘That may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,’’ said I.
He laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it.
‘They took me and they set me alone on the pinnacle of Orthanc,
in the place where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars.
There is no descent save by a narrow stair of many thousand steps,
and the valley below seems far away. I looked on it and saw that,
whereas it had once been green and fair, it was now ﬁlled with pits
and forges. Wolves and orcs were housed in Isengard, for Saruman
was mustering a great force on his own account, in rivalry of Sauron
and not in his service, yet. Over all his works a dark smoke hung and
wrapped itself about the sides of Orthanc. I stood alone on an island
in the clouds; and I had no chance of escape, and my days were
bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I had but little room in which to
pace to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North.
‘That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt assured, apart from the
words of Saruman which might be lies. Long ere I came to Isengard
I had heard tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was
ever in my heart for my friends in the Shire; but still I had some
hope. I hoped that Frodo had set forth at once, as my letter had
urged, and that he had reached Rivendell before the deadly pursuit

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

261

began. And both my fear and my hope proved ill-founded. For my
hope was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was founded
on the cunning of Sauron. But fat men who sell ale have many calls
to answer; and the power of Sauron is still less than fear makes it.
But in the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to
think that the hunters before whom all have ﬂed or fallen would falter
in the Shire far away.’
‘I saw you!’ cried Frodo. ‘You were walking backwards and forwards. The moon shone in your hair.’
Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. ‘It was only a
dream,’ said Frodo, ‘but it suddenly came back to me. I had quite
forgotten it. It came some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.’
‘Then it was late in coming,’ said Gandalf, ‘as you will see. I was
in an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have
seldom been in such need, and do not bear such misfortune well.
Gandalf the Grey caught like a ﬂy in a spider’s treacherous web! Yet
even the most subtle spiders may leave a weak thread.
‘At ﬁrst I feared, as Saruman no doubt intended, that Radagast
had also fallen. Yet I had caught no hint of anything wrong in his
voice or in his eye at our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone
to Isengard, or I should have gone more warily. So Saruman guessed,
and he had concealed his mind and deceived his messenger. It would
have been useless in any case to try and win over the honest Radagast
to treachery. He sought me in good faith, and so persuaded me.
‘That was the undoing of Saruman’s plot. For Radagast knew no
reason why he should not do as I asked; and he rode away towards
Mirkwood where he had many friends of old. And the Eagles of the
Mountains went far and wide, and they saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the mustering of Orcs; and the Nine Riders going
hither and thither in the lands; and they heard news of the escape of
Gollum. And they sent a messenger to bring these tidings to me.
‘So it was that when summer waned, there came a night of moon,
and Gwaihir the Windlord, swiftest of the Great Eagles, came
unlooked-for to Orthanc; and he found me standing on the pinnacle.
Then I spoke to him and he bore me away, before Saruman was
aware. I was far from Isengard, ere the wolves and orcs issued from
the gate to pursue me.
‘ ‘‘How far can you bear me?’’ I said to Gwaihir.
‘ ‘‘Many leagues,’’ said he, ‘‘but not to the ends of the earth. I was
sent to bear tidings not burdens.’’
‘ ‘‘Then I must have a steed on land,’’ I said, ‘‘and a steed surpassingly swift, for I have never had such need of haste before.’’
‘ ‘‘Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord of Rohan sits
in his halls,’’ he said; ‘‘for that is not very far off.’’ And I was glad,

262

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

for in the Riddermark of Rohan the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, dwell,
and there are no horses like those that are bred in that great vale
between the Misty Mountains and the White.
‘ ‘‘Are the Men of Rohan still to be trusted, do you think?’’ I said
to Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith.
‘ ‘‘They pay a tribute of horses,’’ he answered, ‘‘and send many
yearly to Mordor, or so it is said; but they are not yet under the yoke.
But if Saruman has become evil, as you say, then their doom cannot
be long delayed.’’
‘He set me down in the land of Rohan ere dawn; and now I have
lengthened my tale over long. The rest must be more brief. In
Rohan I found evil already at work: the lies of Saruman; and the king
of the land would not listen to my warnings. He bade me take a
horse and be gone; and I chose one much to my liking, but little to
his. I took the best horse in his land, and I have never seen the like
of him.’
‘Then he must be a noble beast indeed,’ said Aragorn; ‘and it
grieves me more than many tidings that might seem worse to learn
that Sauron levies such tribute. It was not so when last I was in that
land.’
‘Nor is it now, I will swear,’ said Boromir. ‘It is a lie that comes
from the Enemy. I know the Men of Rohan, true and valiant, our
allies, dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.’
‘The shadow of Mordor lies on distant lands,’ answered Aragorn.
‘Saruman has fallen under it. Rohan is beset. Who knows what you
will ﬁnd there, if ever you return?’
‘Not this at least,’ said Boromir, ‘that they will buy their lives with
horses. They love their horses next to their kin. And not without
reason, for the horses of the Riddermark come from the ﬁelds of the
North, far from the Shadow, and their race, as that of their masters,
is descended from the free days of old.’
‘True indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘And there is one among them that
might have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of
the Nine cannot vie with him; tireless, swift as the ﬂowing wind.
Shadowfax they called him. By day his coat glistens like silver; and
by night it is like a shade, and he passes unseen. Light is his footfall!
Never before had any man mounted him, but I took him and I tamed
him, and so speedily he bore me that I reached the Shire when Frodo
was on the Barrow-downs, though I set out from Rohan only when
he set out from Hobbiton.
‘But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings
of the Riders, and though I gained on them day by day, they were
ever before me. They had divided their forces, I learned: some

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

263

remained on the eastern borders, not far from the Greenway, and
some invaded the Shire from the south. I came to Hobbiton and
Frodo had gone; but I had words with old Gamgee. Many words
and few to the point. He had much to say about the shortcomings
of the new owners of Bag End.
‘ ‘‘I can’t abide changes,’’ said he, ‘‘not at my time of life, and
least of all changes for the worst.’’ ‘‘Changes for the worst,’’ he
repeated many times.
‘ ‘‘Worst is a bad word,’’ I said to him, ‘‘and I hope you do not
live to see it.’’ But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had
left Hobbiton less than a week before, and that a black horseman
had come to the Hill the same evening. Then I rode on in fear. I
came to Buckland and found it in uproar, as busy as a hive of ants
that has been stirred with a stick. I came to the house at Crickhollow,
and it was broken open and empty; but on the threshold there lay a
cloak that had been Frodo’s. Then for a while hope left me, and I
did not wait to gather news, or I might have been comforted; but I
rode on the trail of the Riders. It was hard to follow, for it went many
ways, and I was at a loss. But it seemed to me that one or two had
ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, for I thought of words
that might be said to the innkeeper.
‘ ‘‘Butterbur they call him,’’ thought I. ‘‘If this delay was his fault,
I will melt all the butter in him. I will roast the old fool over a slow
ﬁre.’’ He expected no less, and when he saw my face he fell down
ﬂat and began to melt on the spot.’
‘What did you do to him?’ cried Frodo in alarm. ‘He was really
very kind to us and did all that he could.’
Gandalf laughed. ‘Don’t be afraid!’ he said. ‘I did not bite, and I
barked very little. So overjoyed was I by the news that I got out of
him, when he stopped quaking, that I embraced the old fellow. How
it had happened I could not then guess, but I learned that you had
been in Bree the night before, and had gone off that morning with
Strider.
‘ ‘‘Strider!’’ I cried, shouting for joy.
‘ ‘‘Yes, sir, I am afraid so, sir,’’ said Butterbur, mistaking me. ‘‘He
got at them, in spite of all that I could do, and they took up with
him. They behaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful,
you might say.’’
‘ ‘‘Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!’’ said I. ‘‘It’s
the best news I have had since Midsummer; it’s worth a gold piece at
the least. May your beer be laid under an enchantment of surpassing
excellence for seven years!’’ said I. ‘‘Now I can take a night’s rest,
the ﬁrst since I have forgotten when.’’
*
*
*

264

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘So I stayed there that night, wondering much what had become
of the Riders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree,
it seemed. But in the night we heard more. Five at least came from
the west, and they threw down the gates and passed through Bree
like a howling wind; and the Bree-folk are still shivering and expecting the end of the world. I got up before dawn and went after
them.
‘I do not know, but it seems clear to me that this is what happened.
Their Captain remained in secret away south of Bree, while two rode
ahead through the village, and four more invaded the Shire. But
when these were foiled in Bree and at Crickhollow, they returned to
their Captain with tidings, and so left the Road unguarded for a
while, except by their spies. The Captain then sent some eastward
straight across country, and he himself with the rest rode along the
Road in great wrath.
‘I galloped to Weathertop like a gale, and I reached it before
sundown on my second day from Bree – and they were there before
me. They drew away from me, for they felt the coming of my anger
and they dared not face it while the Sun was in the sky. But they
closed round at night, and I was besieged on the hill-top, in the old
ring of Amon Sûl. I was hard put to it indeed: such light and ﬂame
cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the war-beacons of old.
‘At sunrise I escaped and ﬂed towards the north. I could not hope
to do more. It was impossible to ﬁnd you, Frodo, in the wilderness,
and it would have been folly to try with all the Nine at my heels. So
I had to trust to Aragorn. But I hoped to draw some of them off,
and yet reach Rivendell ahead of you and send out help. Four Riders
did indeed follow me, but they turned back after a while and made
for the Ford, it seems. That helped a little, for there were only ﬁve,
not nine, when your camp was attacked.
‘I reached here at last by a long hard road, up the Hoarwell and
through the Ettenmoors, and down from the north. It took me nearly
ﬁfteen days from Weathertop, for I could not ride among the rocks
of the troll-fells, and Shadowfax departed. I sent him back to his
master; but a great friendship has grown between us, and if I have
need he will come at my call. But so it was that I came to Rivendell
only two days before the Ring, and news of its peril had already been
brought here – which proved well indeed.
‘And that, Frodo, is the end of my account. May Elrond and the
others forgive the length of it. But such a thing has not happened
before, that Gandalf broke tryst and did not come when he promised.
An account to the Ring-bearer of so strange an event was required,
I think.
‘Well, the Tale is now told, from ﬁrst to last. Here we all are, and

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

265

here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any nearer to our purpose.
What shall we do with it?’
There was a silence. At last Elrond spoke again.
‘This is grievous news concerning Saruman,’ he said; ‘for we
trusted him and he is deep in all our counsels. It is perilous to study
too deeply the arts of the Enemy, for good or for ill. But such falls
and betrayals, alas, have happened before. Of the tales that we have
heard this day the tale of Frodo was most strange to me. I have
known few hobbits, save Bilbo here; and it seems to me that he is
perhaps not so alone and singular as I had thought him. The world
has changed much since I last was on the westward roads.
‘The Barrow-wights we know by many names; and of the Old
Forest many tales have been told: all that now remains is but an
outlier of its northern march. Time was when a squirrel could go
from tree to tree from what is now the Shire to Dunland west of
Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, and many things wild and
strange I knew. But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeed this is still
the same that walked the woods and hills long ago, and even then
was older than the old. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben-adar
we called him, oldest and fatherless. But many another name he
has since been given by other folk: Forn by the Dwarves, Orald by
Northern Men, and other names beside. He is a strange creature,
but maybe I should have summoned him to our Council.’
‘He would not have come,’ said Gandalf.
‘Could we not still send messages to him and obtain his help?’
asked Erestor. ‘It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.’
‘No, I should not put it so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Say rather that the
Ring has no power over him. He is his own master. But he cannot
alter the Ring itself, nor break its power over others. And now he is
withdrawn into a little land, within bounds that he has set, though
none can see them, waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will
not step beyond them.’
‘But within those bounds nothing seems to dismay him,’ said
Erestor. ‘Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever
harmless?’
‘No,’ said Gandalf, ‘not willingly. He might do so, if all the free
folk of the world begged him, but he would not understand the need.
And if he were given the Ring, he would soon forget it, or most likely
throw it away. Such things have no hold on his mind. He would be
a most unsafe guardian; and that alone is answer enough.’
‘But in any case,’ said Glorﬁndel, ‘to send the Ring to him would
only postpone the day of evil. He is far away. We could not now take
it back to him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy. And even if we

266

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

could, soon or late the Lord of the Rings would learn of its hiding
place and would bend all his power towards it. Could that power be
deﬁed by Bombadil alone? I think not. I think that in the end, if all
else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last as he was First; and then
Night will come.’
‘I know little of Iarwain save the name,’ said Galdor; ‘but Glorﬁndel, I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless
such power is in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron can
torture and destroy the very hills. What power still remains lies with
us, here in Imladris, or with Cı́rdan at the Havens, or in Lórien. But
have they the strength, have we here the strength to withstand the
Enemy, the coming of Sauron at the last, when all else is overthrown?’
‘I have not the strength,’ said Elrond; ‘neither have they.’
‘Then if the Ring cannot be kept from him for ever by strength,’
said Glorﬁndel, ‘two things only remain for us to attempt: to send it
over the Sea, or to destroy it.’
‘But Gandalf has revealed to us that we cannot destroy it by any
craft that we here possess,’ said Elrond. ‘And they who dwell beyond
the Sea would not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth;
it is for us who still dwell here to deal with it.’
‘Then,’ said Glorﬁndel, ‘let us cast it into the deeps, and so make
the lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that even at the
Council his feet were already on a crooked path. He knew that the
Ring was not lost for ever, but wished us to think so; for he began
to lust for it for himself. Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it
would be safe.’
‘Not safe for ever,’ said Gandalf. ‘There are many things in the
deep waters; and seas and lands may change. And it is not our part
here to take thought only for a season, or for a few lives of Men, or
for a passing age of the world. We should seek a ﬁnal end of this
menace, even if we do not hope to make one.’
‘And that we shall not ﬁnd on the roads to the Sea,’ said Galdor.
‘If the return to Iarwain be thought too dangerous, then ﬂight to the
Sea is now fraught with gravest peril. My heart tells me that Sauron
will expect us to take the western way, when he learns what has
befallen. He soon will. The Nine have been unhorsed indeed, but
that is but a respite, ere they ﬁnd new steeds and swifter. Only the
waning might of Gondor stands now between him and a march in
power along the coasts into the North; and if he comes, assailing the
White Towers and the Havens, hereafter the Elves may have no
escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.’
‘Long yet will that march be delayed,’ said Boromir. ‘Gondor
wanes, you say. But Gondor stands, and even the end of its strength
is still very strong.’

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

267

‘And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back the Nine,’ said
Galdor. ‘And other roads he may ﬁnd that Gondor does not guard.’
‘Then,’ said Erestor, ‘there are but two courses, as Glorﬁndel
already has declared: to hide the Ring for ever; or to unmake it. But
both are beyond our power. Who will read this riddle for us?’
‘None here can do so,’ said Elrond gravely. ‘At least none can
foretell what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it
seems to me now clear which is the road that we must take. The
westward road seems easiest. Therefore it must be shunned. It will
be watched. Too often the Elves have ﬂed that way. Now at this last
we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen. There lies our hope,
if hope it be. To walk into peril – to Mordor. We must send the Ring
to the Fire.’
Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house, looking out upon
a sunlit valley ﬁlled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness
in his heart. Boromir stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He was
ﬁngering his great horn and frowning. At length he spoke.
‘I do not understand all this,’ he said. ‘Saruman is a traitor, but
did he not have a glimpse of wisdom? Why do you speak ever of
hiding and destroying? Why should we not think that the Great Ring
has come into our hands to serve us in the very hour of need? Wielding
it the Free Lords of the Free may surely defeat the Enemy. That is
what he most fears, I deem.
‘The Men of Gondor are valiant, and they will never submit; but
they may be beaten down. Valour needs ﬁrst strength, and then a
weapon. Let the Ring be your weapon, if it has such power as you
say. Take it and go forth to victory!’
‘Alas, no,’ said Elrond. ‘We cannot use the Ruling Ring. That we
now know too well. It belongs to Sauron and was made by him alone,
and is altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone
to wield at will, save only those who have already a great power of
their own. But for them it holds an even deadlier peril. The very
desire of it corrupts the heart. Consider Saruman. If any of the Wise
should with this Ring overthrow the Lord of Mordor, using his own
arts, he would then set himself on Sauron’s throne, and yet another
Dark Lord would appear. And that is another reason why the Ring
should be destroyed: as long as it is in the world it will be a danger
even to the Wise. For nothing is evil in the beginning. Even Sauron
was not so. I fear to take the Ring to hide it. I will not take the Ring
to wield it.’
‘Nor I,’ said Gandalf.
Boromir looked at them doubtfully, but he bowed his head. ‘So
be it,’ he said. ‘Then in Gondor we must trust to such weapons as

268

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

we have. And at the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we
will ﬁght on. Mayhap the Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the
tide – if the hand that wields it has inherited not an heirloom only,
but the sinews of the Kings of Men.’
‘Who can tell?’ said Aragorn. ‘But we will put it to the test one
day.’
‘May the day not be too long delayed,’ said Boromir. ‘For though
I do not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort us to know that
others fought also with all the means that they have.’
‘Then be comforted,’ said Elrond. ‘For there are other powers
and realms that you know not, and they are hidden from you. Anduin
the Great ﬂows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the
Gates of Gondor.’
‘Still it might be well for all,’ said Glóin the Dwarf, ‘if all these
strengths were joined, and the powers of each were used in league.
Other rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be used in our
need. The Seven are lost to us – if Balin has not found the ring of
Thrór, which was the last; naught has been heard of it since Thrór
perished in Moria. Indeed I may now reveal that it was partly in hope
to ﬁnd that ring that Balin went away.’
‘Balin will ﬁnd no ring in Moria,’ said Gandalf. ‘Thrór gave it to
Thráin his son, but not Thráin to Thorin. It was taken with torment
from Thráin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.’
‘Ah, alas!’ cried Glóin. ‘When will the day come of our revenge?
But still there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves?
Very mighty Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet
they too were made by the Dark Lord long ago. Are they idle? I see
Elf-lords here. Will they not say?’
The Elves returned no answer. ‘Did you not hear me, Glóin?’ said
Elrond. ‘The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch
them. But of them it is not permitted to speak. So much only in this
hour of doubt I may now say. They are not idle. But they were not
made as weapons of war or conquest: that is not their power. Those
who made them did not desire strength or domination or hoarded
wealth, but understanding, making, and healing, to preserve all things
unstained. These things the Elves of Middle-earth have in some
measure gained, though with sorrow. But all that has been wrought
by those who wield the Three will turn to their undoing, and their
minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron, if he regains the
One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his
purpose.’
‘But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring were destroyed,
as you counsel?’ asked Glóin.
‘We know not for certain,’ answered Elrond sadly. ‘Some hope

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

269

that the Three Rings, which Sauron has never touched, would then
become free, and their rulers might heal the hurts of the world that
he has wrought. But maybe when the One has gone, the Three will
fail, and many fair things will fade and be forgotten. That is my
belief.’
‘Yet all the Elves are willing to endure this chance,’ said Glorﬁndel,
‘if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his
dominion be taken away for ever.’
‘Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,’ said
Erestor, ‘and yet we come no nearer. What strength have we for the
ﬁnding of the Fire in which it was made? That is the path of despair.
Of folly I would say, if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid
me.’
‘Despair, or folly?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is not despair, for despair is
only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not. It is
wisdom to recognize necessity, when all other courses have been
weighed, though as folly it may appear to those who cling to false
hope. Well, let folly be our cloak, a veil before the eyes of the Enemy!
For he is very wise, and weighs all things to a nicety in the scales of
his malice. But the only measure that he knows is desire, desire for
power; and so he judges all hearts. Into his heart the thought will
not enter that any will refuse it, that having the Ring we may seek
to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of reckoning.’
‘At least for a while,’ said Elrond. ‘The road must be trod, but it
will be very hard. And neither strength nor wisdom will carry us far
upon it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much
hope as the strong. Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the
wheels of the world: small hands do them because they must, while
the eyes of the great are elsewhere.’
‘Very well, very well, Master Elrond!’ said Bilbo suddenly. ‘Say
no more! It is plain enough what you are pointing at. Bilbo the silly
hobbit started this affair, and Bilbo had better ﬁnish it, or himself. I
was very comfortable here, and getting on with my book. If you want
to know, I am just writing an ending for it. I had thought of putting:
and he lived happily ever afterwards to the end of his days. It is a good
ending, and none the worse for having been used before. Now I shall
have to alter that: it does not look like coming true; and anyway there
will evidently have to be several more chapters, if I live to write them.
It is a frightful nuisance. When ought I to start?’
Boromir looked in surprise at Bilbo, but the laughter died on his
lips when he saw that all the others regarded the old hobbit with grave
respect. Only Glóin smiled, but his smile came from old memories.
‘Of course, my dear Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you had really started

270

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

this affair, you might be expected to ﬁnish it. But you know well
enough now that starting is too great a claim for any, and that only
a small part is played in great deeds by any hero. You need not bow!
Though the word was meant, and we do not doubt that under jest
you are making a valiant offer. But one beyond your strength, Bilbo.
You cannot take this thing back. It has passed on. If you need my
advice any longer, I should say that your part is ended, unless as a
recorder. Finish your book, and leave the ending unaltered! There
is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when they come
back.’
Bilbo laughed. ‘I have never known you give me pleasant advice
before,’ he said. ‘As all your unpleasant advice has been good, I
wonder if this advice is not bad. Still, I don’t suppose I have the
strength or luck left to deal with the Ring. It has grown, and I have
not. But tell me: what do you mean by they?’
‘The messengers who are sent with the Ring.’
‘Exactly! And who are they to be? That seems to me what this
Council has to decide, and all that it has to decide. Elves may thrive
on speech alone, and Dwarves endure great weariness; but I am only
an old hobbit, and I miss my meal at noon. Can’t we think of some
names now? Or put it off till after dinner?’
No one answered. The noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo
glanced at all the faces, but they were not turned to him. All the
Council sat with downcast eyes, as if in deep thought. A great dread
fell on him, as if he was awaiting the pronouncement of some doom
that he had long foreseen and vainly hoped might after all never be
spoken. An overwhelming longing to rest and remain at peace by
Bilbo’s side in Rivendell ﬁlled all his heart. At last with an effort he
spoke, and wondered to hear his own words, as if some other will
was using his small voice.
‘I will take the Ring,’ he said, ‘though I do not know the way.’
Elrond raised his eyes and looked at him, and Frodo felt his heart
pierced by the sudden keenness of the glance. ‘If I understand aright
all that I have heard,’ he said, ‘I think that this task is appointed for
you, Frodo; and that if you do not ﬁnd a way, no one will. This is
the hour of the Shire-folk, when they arise from their quiet ﬁelds to
shake the towers and counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise
could have foreseen it? Or, if they are wise, why should they expect
to know it, until the hour has struck?
‘But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that none could lay it on
another. I do not lay it on you. But if you take it freely, I will say
that your choice is right; and though all the mighty Elf-friends of old,

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

271

Hador, and Húrin, and Túrin, and Beren himself were assembled
together, your seat should be among them.’
‘But you won’t send him off alone surely, Master?’ cried Sam,
unable to contain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner
where he had been quietly sitting on the ﬂoor.
‘No indeed!’ said Elrond, turning towards him with a smile. ‘You
at least shall go with him. It is hardly possible to separate you from
him, even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.’
Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. ‘A nice pickle we have
landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking his head.

Chapter 3
THE RING GOES SOUTH
Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo’s
room. Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam
had crept into the Council, and had been chosen as Frodo’s companion.
‘It’s most unfair,’ said Pippin. ‘Instead of throwing him out, and
clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!’
‘Rewards!’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t imagine a more severe punishment.
You are not thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this
hopeless journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was
done, and I could rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.’
‘I don’t wonder,’ said Merry, ‘and I wish you could. But we are
envying Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment
for any of us to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a
long way with you and been through some stiff times. We want to
go on.’
‘That’s what I meant,’ said Pippin. ‘We hobbits ought to stick
together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me up. There
must be someone with intelligence in the party.’
‘Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!’ said
Gandalf, looking in through the window, which was near the ground.
‘But you are all worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided
yet.’
‘Nothing decided!’ cried Pippin. ‘Then what were you all doing?
You were shut up for hours.’
‘Talking,’ said Bilbo. ‘There was a deal of talk, and everyone had
an eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas’s bit of news about
Gollum caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.’
‘You were wrong,’ said Gandalf. ‘You were inattentive. I had
already heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real
eye-openers, as you put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only
one that was not surprised.’
‘Well, anyway,’ said Bilbo, ‘nothing was decided beyond choosing
poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to
that, if I was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair
number, when the reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf ?’
‘Yes,’ said the wizard. ‘Some of the scouts have been sent out
already. More will go tomorrow. Elrond is sending Elves, and they
will get in touch with the Rangers, and maybe with Thranduil’s folk

THE RING GOES SOUTH

275

the black horses had been found at once drowned in the ﬂooded
Ford. On the rocks of the rapids below it searchers discovered the
bodies of ﬁve more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and tattered.
Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the
North.
‘Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,’ said Gandalf.
‘It is rash to be too sure, yet I think that we may hope now that the
Ringwraiths were scattered, and have been obliged to return as best
they could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.
‘If that is so, it will be some time before they can begin the hunt
again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to
journey all the way to the borders of Rivendell before they can pick
up our trail. And if we are careful that will be hard to ﬁnd. But we
must delay no longer.’
Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely at Frodo.
‘The time has come,’ he said. ‘If the Ring is to set out, it must go
soon. But those who go with it must not count on their errand being
aided by war or force. They must pass into the domain of the Enemy
far from aid. Do you still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be
the Ring-bearer?’
‘I do,’ said Frodo. ‘I will go with Sam.’
‘Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,’ said
Elrond. ‘I can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is
to be achieved I do not know. The Shadow has crept now to the feet
of the Mountains, and draws nigh even to the borders of the Greyﬂood; and under the Shadow all is dark to me. You will meet many
foes, some open, and some disguised; and you may ﬁnd friends upon
your way when you least look for it. I will send out messages, such
as I can contrive, to those whom I know in the wide world; but so
perilous are the lands now become that some may well miscarry, or
come no quicker than you yourself.
‘And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far as
they will or fortune allows. The number must be few, since your
hope is in speed and secrecy. Had I a host of Elves in armour of
the Elder Days, it would avail little, save to arouse the power of
Mordor.
‘The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine Walkers
shall be set against the Nine Riders that are evil. With you and your
faithful servant, Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great task, and
maybe the end of his labours.
‘For the rest, they shall represent the other Free Peoples of the
World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be for the Elves; and

276

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gimli son of Glóin for the Dwarves. They are willing to go at least
to the passes of the Mountains, and maybe beyond. For men you
shall have Aragorn son of Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns
him closely.’
‘Strider!’ cried Frodo.
‘Yes,’ he said with a smile. ‘I ask leave once again to be your
companion, Frodo.’
‘I would have begged you to come,’ said Frodo, ‘only I thought
you were going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.’
‘I am,’ said Aragorn. ‘And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be
re-forged ere I set out to war. But your road and our road lie together
for many hundreds of miles. Therefore Boromir will also be in the
Company. He is a valiant man.’
‘There remain two more to be found,’ said Elrond. ‘These I will
consider. Of my household I may ﬁnd some that it seems good to
me to send.’
‘But that will leave no place for us!’ cried Pippin in dismay. ‘We
don’t want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.’
‘That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what
lies ahead,’ said Elrond.
‘Neither does Frodo,’ said Gandalf, unexpectedly supporting
Pippin. ‘Nor do any of us see clearly. It is true that if these hobbits
understood the danger, they would not dare to go. But they would
still wish to go, or wish that they dared, and be shamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in this matter it would be well to trust
rather to their friendship than to great wisdom. Even if you chose
for us an Elf-lord, such as Glorﬁndel, he could not storm the
Dark Tower, nor open the road to the Fire by the power that is in
him.’
‘You speak gravely,’ said Elrond, ‘but I am in doubt. The Shire,
I forebode, is not free now from peril; and these two I had thought
to send back there as messengers, to do what they could, according
to the fashion of their country, to warn the people of their danger.
In any case, I judge that the younger of these two, Peregrin Took,
should remain. My heart is against his going.’
‘Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send
me home tied in a sack,’ said Pippin. ‘For otherwise I shall follow
the Company.’
‘Let it be so then. You shall go,’ said Elrond, and he sighed. ‘Now
the tale of Nine is ﬁlled. In seven days the Company must depart.’
The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on
its blade was traced a device of seven stars set between the crescent
Moon and the rayed Sun, and about them was written many runes;

THE RING GOES SOUTH

277

for Aragorn son of Arathorn was going to war upon the marches of
Mordor. Very bright was that sword when it was made whole again;
the light of the sun shone redly in it, and the light of the moon shone
cold, and its edge was hard and keen. And Aragorn gave it a new
name and called it Andúril, Flame of the West.
Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of their road
and the perils they would meet; and they pondered the storied and
ﬁgured maps and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond.
Sometimes Frodo was with them; but he was content to lean on their
guidance, and he spent as much time as he could with Bilbo.
In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the
Hall of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the
lay of Beren and Lúthien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in
the day, while Merry and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and
Sam were to be found with Bilbo in his own small room. Then
Bilbo would read passages from his book (which still seemed very
incomplete), or scraps of his verses, or would take notes of Frodo’s
adventures.
On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo, and
the old hobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden box. He lifted
the lid and fumbled inside.
‘Here is your sword,’ he said. ‘But it was broken, you know. I
took it to keep it safe but I’ve forgotten to ask if the smiths could
mend it. No time now. So I thought, perhaps, you would care to
have this, don’t you know?’
He took from the box a small sword in an old shabby leathern
scabbard. Then he drew it, and its polished and well-tended blade
glittered suddenly, cold and bright. ‘This is Sting,’ he said, and thrust
it with little effort deep into a wooden beam. ‘Take it, if you like.
I shan’t want it again, I expect.’
Frodo accepted it gratefully.
‘Also there is this!’ said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed
to be rather heavy for its size. He unwound several folds of old cloth,
and held up a small shirt of mail. It was close-woven of many rings,
as supple almost as linen, cold as ice, and harder than steel. It shone
like moonlit silver, and was studded with white gems. With it was a
belt of pearl and crystal.
‘It’s a pretty thing, isn’t it?’ said Bilbo, moving it in the light. ‘And
useful. It is my dwarf-mail that Thorin gave me. I got it back from
Michel Delving before I started, and packed it with my luggage. I
brought all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, except the
Ring. But I did not expect to use this, and I don’t need it now, except
to look at sometimes. You hardly feel any weight when you put
it on.’

278

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I should look – well, I don’t think I should look right in it,’ said
Frodo.
‘Just what I said myself,’ said Bilbo. ‘But never mind about looks.
You can wear it under your outer clothes. Come on! You must share
this secret with me. Don’t tell anybody else! But I should feel happier
if I knew you were wearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the
knives of the Black Riders,’ he ended in a low voice.
‘Very well, I will take it,’ said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him, and
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the
top his old weather-stained breeches, tunic, and jacket.
‘Just a plain hobbit you look,’ said Bilbo. ‘But there is more about
you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to you!’ He turned
away and looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune.
‘I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all your
past kindnesses,’ said Frodo.
‘Don’t try!’ said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping him
on the back. ‘Ow!’ he cried. ‘You are too hard now to slap! But there
you are: Hobbits must stick together, and especially Bagginses. All I
ask in return is: take as much care of yourself as you can, and bring
back all the news you can, and any old songs and tales you can come
by. I’ll do my best to ﬁnish my book before you return. I should like
to write the second book, if I am spared.’ He broke off and turned
to the window again, singing softly.
I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of all that I have seen,
of meadow-ﬂowers and butterﬂies
in summers that have been;
Of yellow leaves and gossamer
in autumns that there were,
with morning mist and silver sun
and wind upon my hair.
I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of how the world will be
when winter comes without a spring
that I shall ever see.
For still there are so many things
that I have never seen:
in every wood in every spring
there is a different green.

THE RING GOES SOUTH

279

I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of people long ago,
and people who will see a world
that I shall never know.
But all the while I sit and think
of times there were before,
I listen for returning feet
and voices at the door.
It was a cold grey day near the end of December. The East Wind
was streaming through the bare branches of the trees, and seething
in the dark pines on the hills. Ragged clouds were hurrying overhead,
dark and low. As the cheerless shadows of the early evening began
to fall the Company made ready to set out. They were to start at
dusk, for Elrond counselled them to journey under cover of night as
often as they could, until they were far from Rivendell.
‘You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,’ he said.
‘I do not doubt that news of the discomﬁture of the Riders has already
reached him, and he will be ﬁlled with wrath. Soon now his spies on
foot and wing will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the sky
above you must beware as you go on your way.’
The Company took little gear of war, for their hope was in secrecy
not in battle. Aragorn had Andúril but no other weapon, and he went
forth clad only in rusty green and brown, as a Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a long sword, in fashion like Andúril but of less
lineage, and he bore also a shield and his war-horn.
‘Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,’ he said, ‘and
then let all the foes of Gondor ﬂee!’ Putting it to his lips he blew a
blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that
voice in Rivendell sprang to their feet.
‘Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir,’ said
Elrond, ‘until you stand once more on the borders of your land, and
dire need is on you.’
‘Maybe,’ said Boromir. ‘But always I have let my horn cry at
setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I
will not go forth as a thief in the night.’
Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-rings, for
dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed
axe. Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white
knife. The younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from
the barrow; but Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo
wished, remained hidden. Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side

280

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was the elven-sword Glamdring, the mate of Orcrist that lay now
upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain.
All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and
they had jackets and cloaks lined with fur. Spare food and clothes
and blankets and other needs were laden on a pony, none other than
the poor beast that they had brought from Bree.
The stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change on
him: he was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth. It was
Sam who had insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he
called him) would pine, if he did not come.
‘That animal can nearly talk,’ he said, ‘and would talk, if he stayed
here much longer. He gave me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could
speak it: if you don’t let me go with you, Sam, I’ll follow on my
own.’ So Bill was going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only
member of the Company that did not seem depressed.
Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the ﬁre, and they
were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the
house. A gleam of ﬁrelight came from the open doors, and soft lights
were glowing in many windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent
on the doorstep beside Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to
his knees; only Elrond knew fully what this hour meant to him. The
others could be seen as grey shapes in the darkness.
Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and staring
moodily into the gloom where the river roared stonily below; his
desire for adventure was at its lowest ebb.
‘Bill, my lad,’ he said, ‘you oughtn’t to have took up with us. You
could have stayed here and et the best hay till the new grass comes.’
Bill swished his tail and said nothing.
Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in
his mind all the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had
forgotten anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little
box of salt that he always carried and reﬁlled when he could; a good
supply of pipe-weed (but not near enough, I’ll warrant); ﬂint and
tinder; woollen hose; linen; various small belongings of his master’s
that Frodo had forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in
triumph when they were called for. He went through them all.
‘Rope!’ he muttered. ‘No rope! And only last night you said to
yourself: ‘‘Sam, what about a bit of rope? You’ll want it, if you haven’t
got it.’’ Well, I’ll want it. I can’t get it now.’
At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he called the
Company to him. ‘This is my last word,’ he said in a low voice. ‘The
Ring-bearer is setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom. On him

THE RING GOES SOUTH

281

alone is any charge laid: neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver
it to any servant of the Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save
members of the Company and the Council, and only then in gravest
need. The others go with him as free companions, to help him on
his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside into other paths,
as chance allows. The further you go, the less easy will it be to
withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further than you
will. For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you
cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.’
‘Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,’ said
Gimli.
‘Maybe,’ said Elrond, ‘but let him not vow to walk in the dark,
who has not seen the nightfall.’
‘Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,’ said Gimli.
‘Or break it,’ said Elrond. ‘Look not too far ahead! But go now
with good hearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves and Men
and all Free Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!’
‘Good ... good luck!’ cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. ‘I don’t
suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall
expect a full account when you get back. And don’t be too long!
Farewell!’
Many others of Elrond’s household stood in the shadows and
watched them go, bidding them farewell with soft voices. There was
no laughter, and no song or music. At last they turned away and
faded silently into the dusk.
They crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths
that led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length
to the high moor where the wind hissed through the heather. Then
with one glance at the Last Homely House twinkling below them
they strode away far into the night.
At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards
went on by narrow paths among the folded lands. Their purpose was
to hold this course west of the Mountains for many miles and days.
The country was much rougher and more barren than in the green
vale of the Great River in Wilderland on the other side of the range,
and their going would be slow; but they hoped in this way to escape
the notice of unfriendly eyes. The spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom
been seen in this empty country, and the paths were little known
except to the people of Rivendell.
Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew
this land even in the dark. The others were in ﬁle behind, and Legolas
whose eyes were keen was the rearguard. The ﬁrst part of their journey

282

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was hard and dreary, and Frodo remembered little of it, save the
wind. For many sunless days an icy blast came from the Mountains
in the east, and no garment seemed able to keep out its searching
ﬁngers. Though the Company was well clad, they seldom felt warm,
either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during the middle of
the day, in some hollow of the land, or hidden under the tangled
thorn-bushes that grew in thickets in many places. In the late afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold
and cheerless as a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a
ﬁre. In the evening they went on again, always as nearly southward
as they could ﬁnd a way.
At ﬁrst it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked and
stumbled until they were weary, they were creeping forward like
snails, and getting nowhere. Each day the land looked much the same
as it had the day before. Yet steadily the mountains were drawing
nearer. South of Rivendell they rose ever higher, and bent westwards;
and about the feet of the main range there was tumbled an ever wider
land of bleak hills, and deep valleys ﬁlled with turbulent waters. Paths
were few and winding, and led them often only to the edge of some
sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.
They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed.
The wind suddenly fell and then veered round to the south. The
swift-ﬂowing clouds lifted and melted away, and the sun came out,
pale and bright. There came a cold clear dawn at the end of a long
stumbling night-march. The travellers reached a low ridge crowned
with ancient holly-trees whose grey-green trunks seemed to have been
built out of the very stone of the hills. Their dark leaves shone and
their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.
Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty mountains that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company
was taking. At the left of this high range rose three peaks; the tallest
and nearest stood up like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare,
northern precipice was still largely in the shadow, but where the
sunlight slanted upon it, it glowed red.
Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his hand. ‘We
have done well,’ he said. ‘We have reached the borders of the country
that Men call Hollin; many Elves lived here in happier days, when
Eregion was its name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow ﬂies we
have come, though many long miles further our feet have walked.
The land and the weather will be milder now, but perhaps all the
more dangerous.’
‘Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said Frodo,
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face.

THE RING GOES SOUTH

283

‘But the mountains are ahead of us,’ said Pippin. ‘We must have
turned eastwards in the night.’
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you see further ahead in the clear light.
Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west. There are
many maps in Elrond’s house, but I suppose you never thought to
look at them?’
‘Yes I did, sometimes,’ said Pippin, ‘but I don’t remember them.
Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing.’
‘I need no map,’ said Gimli, who had come up with Legolas, and
was gazing out before him with a strange light in his deep eyes. ‘There
is the land where our fathers worked of old, and we have wrought
the image of those mountains into many works of metal and of stone,
and into many songs and tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz,
Zirak, Shathûr.
‘Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but
I know them and their names, for under them lies Khazad-dûm, the
Dwarrowdelf, that is now called the Black Pit, Moria in the Elvish
tongue. Yonder stands Barazinbar, the Redhorn, cruel Caradhras;
and beyond him are Silvertine and Cloudyhead: Celebdil the White,
and Fanuidhol the Grey, that we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathûr.
‘There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their arms lies
the deep-shadowed valley which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the
Dimrill Dale, which the Elves call Nanduhirion.’
‘It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,’ said Gandalf. ‘If
we climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under the far side
of Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep
vale of the Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River
Silverlode rises in its icy springs.’
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram,’ said Gimli, ‘and cold are the
springs of Kibil-nâla. My heart trembles at the thought that I may
see them soon.’
‘May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf !’ said Gandalf.
‘But whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We
must go down the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the
Great River, and then——’
He paused.
‘Yes, and where then?’ asked Merry.
‘To the end of the journey – in the end,’ said Gandalf. ‘We cannot
look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the ﬁrst stage is safely over.
I think we will rest here, not only today but tonight as well. There
is a wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country
before it wholly forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.’
‘That is true,’ said Legolas. ‘But the Elves of this land were of a
race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do

284

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

not now remember them. Only I hear the stones lament them: deep
they delved us, fair they wrought us, high they builded us; but they are
gone. They are gone. They sought the Havens long ago.’
That morning they lit a ﬁre in a deep hollow shrouded by great
bushes of holly, and their supper-breakfast was merrier than it had
been since they set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for
they expected to have all the night to sleep in, and they did not mean
to go on again until the evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was
silent and restless. After a while he left the Company and wandered
on to the ridge; there he stood in the shadow of a tree, looking out
southwards and westwards, with his head posed as if he was listening.
Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked down at the
others laughing and talking.
‘What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called up. ‘What are you
looking for? Do you miss the East Wind?’
‘No indeed,’ he answered. ‘But I miss something. I have been in
the country of Hollin in many seasons. No folk dwell here now, but
many other creatures live here at all times, especially birds. Yet now
all things but you are silent. I can feel it. There is no sound for miles
about us, and your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not
understand it.’
Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. ‘But what do you guess
is the reason?’ he asked. ‘Is there more in it than surprise at seeing
four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where people are so
seldom seen or heard?’
‘I hope that is it,’ answered Aragorn. ‘But I have a sense of watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.’
‘Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you bring a
Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if the
Ranger is Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set
the watch.’
It was Sam’s turn that day to take the ﬁrst watch, but Aragorn
joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even
Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The
swish of the pony’s tail and the occasional movements of his feet
became loud noises. Sam could hear his own joints creaking, if he
stirred. Dead silence was around him, and over all hung a clear blue
sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. Away in the South a dark
patch appeared, and grew, and drove north like ﬂying smoke in the
wind.
‘What’s that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud,’ said Sam in a
whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intently at the

THE RING GOES SOUTH

285

sky; but before long Sam could see for himself what was approaching.
Flocks of birds, ﬂying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and
traversing all the land as if they were searching for something; and
they were steadily drawing nearer.
‘Lie ﬂat and still!’ hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the
shade of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away
suddenly from the main host, and came, ﬂying low, straight towards
the ridge. Sam thought they were a kind of crow of large size. As
they passed overhead, in so dense a throng that their shadow followed
them darkly over the ground below, one harsh croak was heard.
Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and west,
and the sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then he sprang up
and went and wakened Gandalf.
‘Regiments of black crows are ﬂying over all the land between the
Mountains and the Greyﬂood,’ he said, ‘and they have passed over
Hollin. They are not natives here; they are crebain out of Fangorn
and Dunland. I do not know what they are about: possibly there is
some trouble away south from which they are ﬂeeing; but I think
they are spying out the land. I have also glimpsed many hawks ﬂying
high up in the sky. I think we ought to move again this evening.
Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.’
‘And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,’ said Gandalf; ‘and how
we can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we
will think of that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark,
I am afraid that you are right.’
‘Luckily our ﬁre made little smoke, and had burned low before
the crebain came,’ said Aragorn. ‘It must be put out and not lit again.’
‘Well if that isn’t a plague and a nuisance!’ said Pippin. The news:
no ﬁre, and a move again by night, had been broken to him, as soon
as he woke in the late afternoon. ‘All because of a pack of crows!
I had looked forward to a real good meal tonight: something hot.’
‘Well, you can go on looking forward,’ said Gandalf. ‘There may
be many unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like
a pipe to smoke in comfort, and warmer feet. However, we are certain
of one thing at any rate: it will get warmer as we get south.’
‘Too warm, I shouldn’t wonder,’ muttered Sam to Frodo. ‘But
I’m beginning to think it’s time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain,
and saw the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at ﬁrst that this
here Redhorn, or whatever its name is, might be it, till Gimli spoke
his piece. A fair jaw-cracker dwarf-language must be!’ Maps conveyed
nothing to Sam’s mind, and all distances in these strange lands
seemed so vast that he was quite out of his reckoning.
All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds

286

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

passed over now and again; but as the westering Sun grew red they
disappeared southwards. At dusk the Company set out, and turning
now half east they steered their course towards Caradhras, which far
away still glowed faintly red in the last light of the vanished Sun.
One by one white stars sprang forth as the sky faded.
Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo
like the remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and
well planned, from Hollin to the mountain-pass. The Moon, now at
the full, rose over the mountains, and cast a pale light in which the
shadows of stones were black. Many of them looked to have been
worked by hands, though now they lay tumbled and ruinous in a
bleak, barren land.
It was the cold chill hour before the ﬁrst stir of dawn, and the
moon was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly he saw or felt
a shadow pass over the high stars, as if for a moment they faded and
then ﬂashed out again. He shivered.
‘Did you see anything pass over?’ he whispered to Gandalf, who
was just ahead.
‘No, but I felt it, whatever it was,’ he answered. ‘It may be nothing,
only a wisp of thin cloud.’
‘It was moving fast then,’ muttered Aragorn, ‘and not with the
wind.’
Nothing further happened that night. The next morning dawned
even brighter than before. But the air was chill again; already the
wind was turning back towards the east. For two more nights they
marched on, climbing steadily but ever more slowly as their road
wound up into the hills, and the mountains towered up, nearer and
nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose before them, a mighty
peak, tipped with snow like silver, but with sheer naked sides, dull
red as if stained with blood.
There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan. The wind
had gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and
looked back.
‘Winter deepens behind us,’ he said quietly to Aragorn. ‘The
heights away north are whiter than they were; snow is lying far down
their shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up towards the
Redhorn Gate. We may well be seen by watchers on that narrow
path, and waylaid by some evil; but the weather may prove a more
deadly enemy than any. What do you think of your course now,
Aragorn?’
Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and
Aragorn were continuing some debate that had begun long before.
He listened anxiously.

THE RING GOES SOUTH

287

‘I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know
well, Gandalf,’ answered Aragorn. ‘And perils known and unknown
will grow as we go on. But we must go on; and it is no good our
delaying the passage of the mountains. Further south there are no
passes, till one comes to the Gap of Rohan. I do not trust that way
since your news of Saruman. Who knows which side now the marshals
of the Horse-lords serve?’
‘Who knows indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is another way, and
not by the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have
spoken of.’
‘But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others,
I beg, not until it is plain that there is no other way.’
‘We must decide before we go further,’ answered Gandalf.
‘Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest
and sleep,’ said Aragorn.
In the late afternoon, while the others were ﬁnishing their breakfast, Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at
Caradhras. Its sides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in
grey cloud. Frodo watched them, wondering which way the debate
would go. When they returned to the Company Gandalf spoke, and
then he knew that it had been decided to face the weather and the
high pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was the other
dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to ﬁll
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been
abandoned.
‘From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ‘I fear that
the Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the
weather that is coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go
with all the speed that we can. Even so it will take us more than two
marches before we reach the top of the pass. Dark will come early
this evening. We must leave as soon as you can get ready.’
‘I will add a word of advice, if I may,’ said Boromir. ‘I was born
under the shadow of the White Mountains and know something of
journeys in the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse,
before we come down on the other side. It will not help us to keep
so secret that we are frozen to death. When we leave here, where
there are still a few trees and bushes, each of us should carry a faggot
of wood, as large as he can bear.’
‘And Bill could take a bit more, couldn’t you, lad?’ said Sam. The
pony looked at him mournfully.
‘Very well,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we must not use the wood – not
unless it is a choice between ﬁre and death.’
*
*
*

288

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The Company set out again, with good speed at ﬁrst; but soon
their way became steep and difﬁcult. The twisting and climbing road
had in many places almost disappeared, and was blocked with many
fallen stones. The night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A bitter
wind swirled among the rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the
knees of the great mountains. The narrow path now wound under a
sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which the grim ﬂanks of Caradhras
towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right was a gulf of darkness
where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine.
Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a moment
at the top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm
and saw the dim white ﬂakes of snow settling on his sleeve.
They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, ﬁlling all
the air, and swirling into Frodo’s eyes. The dark bent shapes of
Gandalf and Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen.
‘I don’t like this at all,’ panted Sam just behind. ‘Snow’s all right
on a ﬁne morning, but I like to be in bed while it’s falling. I wish
this lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.’
Except on the high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare
in the Shire, and was regarded as a pleasant event and a chance for
fun. No living hobbit (save Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter
of 1311, when white wolves invaded the Shire over the frozen
Brandywine.
Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; it was
already ankle-deep about his boots.
‘This is what I feared,’ he said. ‘What do you say now, Aragorn?’
‘That I feared it too,’ Aragorn answered, ‘but less than other
things. I knew the risk of snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far
south, save high up in the mountains. But we are not high yet; we
are still far down, where the paths are usually open all the winter.’
‘I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,’ said Boromir.
‘They say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains
of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange
powers and many allies.’
‘His arm has grown long indeed,’ said Gimli, ‘if he can draw snow
down from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.’
‘His arm has grown long,’ said Gandalf.
While they were halted, the wind died down, and the snow slackened until it almost ceased. They tramped on again. But they had
not gone more than a furlong when the storm returned with fresh
fury. The wind whistled and the snow became a blinding blizzard.
Soon even Boromir found it hard to keep going. The hobbits, bent
nearly double, toiled along behind the taller folk, but it was plain

THE RING GOES SOUTH

289

that they could not go much further, if the snow continued. Frodo’s
feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even Gimli, as stout
as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged.
The Company halted suddenly, as if they had come to an agreement without any words being spoken. They heard eerie noises in
the darkness round them. It may have been only a trick of the wind
in the cracks and gullies of the rocky wall, but the sounds were those
of shrill cries, and wild howls of laughter. Stones began to fall from
the mountain-side, whistling over their heads, or crashing on the path
beside them. Every now and again they heard a dull rumble, as a
great boulder rolled down from hidden heights above.
‘We cannot go further tonight,’ said Boromir. ‘Let those call it the
wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are
aimed at us.’
‘I do call it the wind,’ said Aragorn. ‘But that does not make what
you say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the
world that have little love for those that go on two legs, and yet are
not in league with Sauron, but have purposes of their own. Some
have been in this world longer than he.’
‘Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name,’ said Gimli,
‘long years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these
lands.’
‘It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his attack,’
said Gandalf.
‘But what can we do?’ cried Pippin miserably. He was leaning on
Merry and Frodo, and he was shivering.
‘Either stop where we are, or go back,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is no good
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this path leaves
the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long
hard slope. We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones –
or anything else.’
‘And it is no good going back while the storm holds,’ said Aragorn.
‘We have passed no place on the way up that offered more shelter
than this cliff-wall we are under now.’
‘Shelter!’ muttered Sam. ‘If this is shelter, then one wall and no
roof make a house.’
The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff as they
could. It faced southwards, and near the bottom it leaned out a little,
so that they hoped it would give them some protection from the
northerly wind and from the falling stones. But eddying blasts swirled
round them from every side, and the snow ﬂowed down in ever
denser clouds.
They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony

290

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

stood patiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits, and screened
them a little; but before long the drifting snow was above his hocks,
and it went on mounting. If they had had no larger companions the
hobbits would soon have been entirely buried.
A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast
into a warm and hazy dream. He thought a ﬁre was heating his toes,
and out of the shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo’s
voice speaking. I don’t think much of your diary, he said. Snowstorms on
January the twelfth: there was no need to come back to report that!
But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an effort,
when he felt himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.
‘This will be the death of the halﬂings, Gandalf,’ said Boromir.
‘It is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads. We must
do something to save ourselves.’
‘Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing
out a leathern ﬂask. ‘Just a mouthful each – for all of us. It is very
precious. It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me
at our parting. Pass it round!’
As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant
liquor he felt a new strength of heart, and the heavy drowsiness left
his limbs. The others also revived and found fresh hope and vigour.
But the snow did not relent. It whirled about them thicker than ever,
and the wind blew louder.
‘What do you say to ﬁre?’ asked Boromir suddenly. ‘The choice
seems near now between ﬁre and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall
be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us,
but that will not help us.’
‘You may make a ﬁre, if you can,’ answered Gandalf. ‘If there are
any watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, ﬁre
or no.’
But though they had brought wood and kindlings by the advice
of Boromir, it passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a ﬂame
that would hold amid the swirling wind or catch in the wet fuel. At
last reluctantly Gandalf himself took a hand. Picking up a faggot he
held it aloft for a moment, and then with a word of command, naur
an edraith ammen! he thrust the end of his staff into the midst of it.
At once a great spout of green and blue ﬂame sprang out, and the
wood ﬂared and sputtered.
‘If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,’ he
said. ‘I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can read from
Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.’
But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly eyes.
Their hearts were rejoiced to see the light of the ﬁre. The wood

THE RING GOES SOUTH

291

burned merrily; and though all round it the snow hissed, and pools
of slush crept under their feet, they warmed their hands gladly at the
blaze. There they stood, stooping in a circle round the little dancing
and blowing ﬂames. A red light was on their tired and anxious faces;
behind them the night was like a black wall.
But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell.
The ﬁre burned low, and the last faggot was thrown on.
‘The night is getting old,’ said Aragorn. ‘The dawn is not far off.’
‘If any dawn can pierce these clouds,’ said Gimli.
Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the blackness.
‘The snow is growing less,’ he said, ‘and the wind is quieter.’
Frodo gazed wearily at the ﬂakes still falling out of the dark to be
revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying ﬁre; but for a
long time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly,
as sleep was beginning to creep over him again, he was aware that
the wind had indeed fallen, and the ﬂakes were becoming larger and
fewer. Very slowly a dim light began to grow. At last the snow stopped
altogether.
As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded world.
Below their refuge were white humps and domes and shapeless deeps
beneath which the path that they had trodden was altogether lost;
but the heights above were hidden in great clouds still heavy with
the threat of snow.
Gimli looked up and shook his head. ‘Caradhras has not forgiven
us,’ he said. ‘He has more snow yet to ﬂing at us, if we go on. The
sooner we go back and down the better.’
To this all agreed, but their retreat was now difﬁcult. It might well
prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their ﬁre the
snow lay many feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in
places it had been scooped and piled by the wind into great drifts
against the cliff.
‘If Gandalf would go before us with a bright ﬂame, he might melt
a path for you,’ said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and
he alone of the Company remained still light of heart.
‘If Elves could ﬂy over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to
save us,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I must have something to work on.
I cannot burn snow.’
‘Well,’ said Boromir, ‘when heads are at a loss bodies must serve,
as we say in my country. The strongest of us must seek a way. See!
Though all is now snow-clad, our path, as we came up, turned about
that shoulder of rock down yonder. It was there that the snow ﬁrst
began to burden us. If we could reach that point, maybe it would
prove easier beyond. It is no more than a furlong off, I guess.’

292

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Then let us force a path thither, you and I!’ said Aragorn.
Aragorn was the tallest of the Company, but Boromir, little less
in height, was broader and heavier in build. He led the way, and
Aragorn followed him. Slowly they moved off, and were soon toiling
heavily. In places the snow was breast-high, and often Boromir
seemed to be swimming or burrowing with his great arms rather than
walking.
Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his lips, and
then he turned to the others. ‘The strongest must seek a way, say
you? But I say: let a ploughman plough, but choose an otter for
swimming, and for running light over grass and leaf, or over snow –
an Elf.’
With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed as if
for the ﬁrst time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no
boots, but wore only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made
little imprint in the snow.
‘Farewell!’ he said to Gandalf. ‘I go to ﬁnd the Sun!’ Then swift
as a runner over ﬁrm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the
toiling men, with a wave of his hand he passed them, and sped into
the distance, and vanished round the rocky turn.
The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and
Aragorn dwindled into black specks in the whiteness. At length they
too passed from sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered,
and now a few ﬂakes of snow came curling down again.
An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer, and then
at last they saw Legolas coming back. At the same time Boromir
and Aragorn reappeared round the bend far behind him and came
labouring up the slope.
‘Well,’ cried Legolas as he ran up, ‘I have not brought the Sun.
She is walking in the blue ﬁelds of the South, and a little wreath of
snow on this Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have
brought back a gleam of good hope for those who are doomed to go
on feet. There is the greatest wind-drift of all just beyond the turn,
and there our Strong Men were almost buried. They despaired, until
I returned and told them that the drift was little wider than a wall.
And on the other side the snow suddenly grows less, while further
down it is no more than a white coverlet to cool a hobbit’s toes.’
‘Ah, it is as I said,’ growled Gimli. ‘It was no ordinary storm. It
is the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and
that drift was laid to cut off our escape.’
‘But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with
you,’ said Boromir, who came up at that moment. ‘And doughty
Men too, if I may say it; though lesser men with spades might have

THE RING GOES SOUTH

293

served you better. Still, we have thrust a lane through the drift; and
for that all here may be grateful who cannot run as light as Elves.’
‘But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through
the drift?’ said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.
‘Have hope!’ said Boromir. ‘I am weary, but I still have some
strength left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others
no doubt will make shift to tread the path behind us. Come, Master
Peregrin! I will begin with you.’
He lifted up the hobbit. ‘Cling to my back! I shall need my arms,’
he said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin
marvelled at his strength, seeing the passage that he had already
forced with no other tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened
as he was, he was widening the track for those who followed, thrusting
the snow aside as he went.
They came at length to the great drift. It was ﬂung across the
mountain-path like a sheer and sudden wall, and its crest, sharp as
if shaped with knives, reared up more than twice the height of Boromir; but through the middle a passage had been beaten, rising and
falling like a bridge. On the far side Merry and Pippin were set down,
and there they waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to
arrive.
After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in the narrow
but now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli
perched among the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo.
They passed through the lane; but hardly had Frodo touched the
ground when with a deep rumble there rolled down a fall of stones
and slithering snow. The spray of it half blinded the Company as
they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again they
saw that the path was blocked behind them.
‘Enough, enough!’ cried Gimli. ‘We are departing as quickly as
we may!’ And indeed with that last stroke the malice of the mountain
seemed to be expended, as if Caradhras was satisﬁed that the invaders
had been beaten off and would not dare to return. The threat of
snow lifted; the clouds began to break and the light grew broader.
As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow became steadily
more shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could
trudge along. Soon they all stood once more on the ﬂat shelf at the
head of the steep slope where they had felt the ﬁrst ﬂakes of snow
the night before.
The morning was now far advanced. From the high place they
looked back westwards over the lower lands. Far away in the tumble
of country that lay at the foot of the mountain was the dell from
which they had started to climb the pass.
Frodo’s legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and

294

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

his head was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march
downhill. Black specks swam before his eyes. He rubbed them, but
the black specks remained. In the distance below him, but still high
above the lower foothills, dark dots were circling in the air.
‘The birds again!’ said Aragorn, pointing down.
‘That cannot be helped now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Whether they are
good or evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down
at once. Not even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another
night-fall!’
A cold wind ﬂowed down behind them, as they turned their
backs on the Redhorn Gate, and stumbled wearily down the slope.
Caradhras had defeated them.

Chapter 4
A JOURNEY IN THE DARK
It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, when they
halted for the night. They were very weary. The mountains were
veiled in deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared
them one more mouthful each of the miruvor of Rivendell. When
they had eaten some food he called a council.
‘We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,’ he said. ‘The attack
on the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a
while.’
‘And then where are we to go?’ asked Frodo.
‘We still have our journey and our errand before us,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.’
Pippin’s face brightened visibly at the mere mention of return to
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully. But Aragorn and
Boromir made no sign. Frodo looked troubled.
‘I wish I was back there,’ he said. ‘But how can I return without
shame – unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already
defeated?’
‘You are right, Frodo,’ said Gandalf: ‘to go back is to admit defeat,
and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring
must remain there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner
or later Rivendell will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter time
it will be destroyed. The Ringwraiths are deadly enemies, but they
are only shadows yet of the power and terror they would possess if
the Ruling Ring was on their master’s hand again.’
‘Then we must go on, if there is a way,’ said Frodo with a sigh.
Sam sank back into gloom.
‘There is a way that we may attempt,’ said Gandalf. ‘I thought
from the beginning, when ﬁrst I considered this journey, that we
should try it. But it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of
it to the Company before. Aragorn was against it, until the pass over
the mountains had at least been tried.’
‘If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil
indeed,’ said Merry. ‘But you had better tell us about it, and let us
know the worst at once.’
‘The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria,’ said
Gandalf. Only Gimli lifted up his head; a smouldering ﬁre was in his
eyes. On all the others a dread fell at the mention of that name. Even
to the hobbits it was a legend of vague fear.

296

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it will
lead through Moria?’ said Aragorn darkly.
‘It is a name of ill omen,’ said Boromir. ‘Nor do I see the need
to go there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan, where men are friendly
to my people, taking the road that I followed on my way hither. Or
we might pass by and cross the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin,
and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to the sea.’
‘Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman? With him
I may have business of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must
not come near Isengard, if that can by any means be prevented. The
Gap of Rohan is closed to us while we go with the Bearer.
‘As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We might
spend a year in such a journey, and we should pass through many
lands that are empty and harbourless. Yet they would not be safe.
The watchful eyes both of Saruman and of the Enemy are on them.
When you came north, Boromir, you were in the Enemy’s eyes only
one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of small concern to
him: his mind was busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But you return
now as a member of the Ring’s Company, and you are in peril as
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase with every
league that we go south under the naked sky.
‘Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has
become more desperate, I fear. I see now little hope, if we do not
soon vanish from sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I
advise that we should go neither over the mountains, nor round them,
but under them. That is a road at any rate that the Enemy will least
expect us to take.’
‘We do not know what he expects,’ said Boromir. ‘He may watch
all roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria would be
to walk into a trap, hardly better than knocking at the gates of the
Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria is black.’
‘You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to
the stronghold of Sauron,’ answered Gandalf. ‘I alone of you have
ever been in the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in his older
and lesser dwelling in Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of
Barad-dûr do not return. But I would not lead you into Moria if
there were no hope of coming out again. If there are Orcs there, it
may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs of the Misty
Mountains were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five Armies.
The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there
is a hope that Moria is still free.
‘There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that in some

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

297

deep hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However
it may prove, one must tread the path that need chooses!’
‘I will tread the path with you, Gandalf !’ said Gimli. ‘I will go
and look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there – if you can
ﬁnd the doors that are shut.’
‘Good, Gimli!’ said Gandalf. ‘You encourage me. We will seek
the hidden doors together. And we will come through. In the ruins
of the Dwarves, a dwarf ’s head will be less easy to bewilder than
Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yet it will not be the ﬁrst time that I have
been to Moria. I sought there long for Thráin son of Thrór after he
was lost. I passed through, and I came out again alive!’
‘I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,’ said Aragorn quietly; ‘but
though I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish
to enter Moria a second time.’
‘And I don’t wish to enter it even once,’ said Pippin.
‘Nor me,’ muttered Sam.
‘Of course not!’ said Gandalf. ‘Who would? But the question is:
who will follow me, if I lead you there?’
‘I will,’ said Gimli eagerly.
‘I will,’ said Aragorn heavily. ‘You followed my lead almost to
disaster in the snow, and have said no word of blame. I will follow
your lead now – if this last warning does not move you. It is not of
the Ring, nor of us others that I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf.
And I say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware!’
‘I will not go,’ said Boromir; ‘not unless the vote of the whole
Company is against me. What do Legolas and the little folk say? The
Ring-bearer’s voice surely should be heard?’
‘I do not wish to go to Moria,’ said Legolas.
The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo
spoke. ‘I do not wish to go,’ he said; ‘but neither do I wish to refuse
the advice of Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we
have slept on it. Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the
morning than in this cold gloom. How the wind howls!’
At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the wind
hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and
wailing round them in the empty spaces of the night.
Suddenly Aragorn leapt to his feet. ‘How the wind howls!’ he
cried. ‘It is howling with wolf-voices. The Wargs have come west of
the Mountains!’
‘Need we wait until morning then?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is as I said.
The hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish
to journey south by night with the wild wolves on his trail?’
‘How far is Moria?’ asked Boromir.

298

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some ﬁfteen miles as
the crow ﬂies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,’ answered Gandalf
grimly.
‘Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,’ said
Boromir. ‘The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one
fears.’
‘True!’ said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. ‘But where
the warg howls, there also the orc prowls.’
‘I wish I had taken Elrond’s advice,’ muttered Pippin to Sam. ‘I
am no good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras
the Bullroarer in me: these howls freeze my blood. I don’t ever
remember feeling so wretched.’
‘My heart’s right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin,’ said Sam. ‘But we
aren’t etten yet, and there are some stout folk here with us. Whatever
may be in store for old Gandalf, I’ll wager it isn’t a wolf ’s belly.’
For their defence in the night the Company climbed to the top of
the small hill under which they had been sheltering. It was crowned
with a knot of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle
of boulder-stones. In the midst of this they lit a ﬁre, for there was
no hope that darkness and silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs.
Round the ﬁre they sat, and those that were not on guard dozed
uneasily. Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated where he stood.
The howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer
and sometimes further off. In the dead of night many shining eyes
were seen peering over the brow of the hill. Some advanced almost
to the ring of stones. At a gap in the circle a great dark wolf-shape
could be seen halted, gazing at them. A shuddering howl broke from
him, as if he were a captain summoning his pack to the assault.
Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft.
‘Listen, Hound of Sauron!’ he cried. ‘Gandalf is here. Fly, if you
value your foul skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come
within this ring.’
The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great leap. At
that moment there was a sharp twang. Legolas had loosed his bow.
There was a hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to the
ground; the Elvish arrow had pierced its throat. The watching eyes
were suddenly extinguished. Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward,
but the hill was deserted; the hunting packs had ﬂed. All about them
the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on the sighing wind.
The night was old, and westward the waning moon was setting,
gleaming ﬁtfully through the breaking clouds. Suddenly Frodo started

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

299

from sleep. Without warning a storm of howls broke out ﬁerce and
wild all about the camp. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently
and was now attacking them from every side at once.
‘Fling fuel on the ﬁre!’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits. ‘Draw your
blades, and stand back to back!’
In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many
grey shapes spring over the ring of stones. More and more followed.
Through the throat of one huge leader Aragorn passed his sword
with a thrust; with a great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another.
Beside them Gimli stood with his stout legs apart, wielding his dwarfaxe. The bow of Legolas was singing.
In the wavering ﬁrelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he
rose up, a great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient
king of stone set upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning
branch and strode to meet the wolves. They gave back before him.
High in the air he tossed the blazing brand. It ﬂared with a sudden
white radiance like lightning; and his voice rolled like thunder.
‘Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!’ he cried.
There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him burst into
a leaf and bloom of blinding ﬂame. The ﬁre leapt from tree-top to
tree-top. The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light. The swords
and knives of the defenders shone and ﬂickered. The last arrow of
Legolas kindled in the air as it ﬂew, and plunged burning into the
heart of a great wolf-chieftain. All the others ﬂed.
Slowly the ﬁre died till nothing was left but falling ash and sparks;
a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly
from the hill, as the ﬁrst light of dawn came dimly in the sky. Their
enemies were routed and did not return.
‘What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin?’ said Sam, sheathing his sword.
‘Wolves won’t get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake!
Nearly singed the hair off my head!’
When the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves
were to be found, and they looked in vain for the bodies of the dead.
No trace of the ﬁght remained but the charred trees and the arrows
of Legolas lying on the hill-top. All were undamaged save one of
which only the point was left.
‘It is as I feared,’ said Gandalf. ‘These were no ordinary wolves
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!’
That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the
command of some power that had no longer any use for snow, since
they had retreated from the pass, a power that wished now to have
a clear light in which things that moved in the wild could be seen
from far away. The wind had been turning through north to

300

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

north-west during the night, and now it failed. The clouds vanished
southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue. As they stood
upon the hillside, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over the
mountain-tops.
‘We must reach the doors before sunset,’ said Gandalf, ‘or I fear
we shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be
winding, for here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in
this country, and only once have I been under the west wall of Moria,
and that was long ago.
‘There it lies,’ he said, pointing away south-eastwards to where
the mountains’ sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet. In the
distance could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs, and in their midst,
taller than the rest, one great grey wall. ‘When we left the pass I led
you southwards, and not back to our starting point, as some of you
may have noticed. It is well that I did so, for now we have several
miles less to cross, and haste is needed. Let us go!’
‘I do not know which to hope,’ said Boromir grimly: ‘that Gandalf
will ﬁnd what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall ﬁnd the
gates lost for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between
wolves and the wall the likeliest chance. Lead on!’
Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard’s side, so eager was he to
come to Moria. Together they led the Company back towards the
mountains. The only road of old to Moria from the west had lain
along the course of a stream, the Sirannon, that ran out from the
feet of the cliffs near where the doors had stood. But either Gandalf
was astray, or else the land had changed in recent years; for he did
not strike the stream where he looked to ﬁnd it, only a few miles
southwards from their start.
The morning was passing towards noon, and still the Company
wandered and scrambled in a barren country of red stones. Nowhere
could they see any gleam of water or hear any sound of it. All was
bleak and dry. Their hearts sank. They saw no living thing, and not
a bird was in the sky; but what the night would bring, if it caught
them in that lost land, none of them cared to think.
Suddenly Gimli, who had pressed on ahead, called back to them.
He was standing on a knoll and pointing to the right. Hurrying up
they saw below them a deep and narrow channel. It was empty and
silent, and hardly a trickle of water ﬂowed among the brown and
red-stained stones of its bed; but on the near side there was a path,
much broken and decayed, that wound its way among the ruined
walls and paving-stones of an ancient highroad.
‘Ah! Here it is at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘This is where the stream
ran: Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

301

happened to the water, I cannot guess; it used to be swift and noisy.
Come! We must hurry on. We are late.’
The Company were footsore and tired; but they trudged doggedly
along the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned
from the noon and began to go west. After a brief halt and a hasty
meal they went on again. Before them the mountains frowned, but
their path lay in a deep trough of land and they could see only the
higher shoulders and the far eastward peaks.
At length they came to a sharp bend. There the road, which had
been veering southwards between the brink of the channel and a
steep fall of the land to the left, turned and went due east again.
Rounding the corner they saw before them a low cliff, some ﬁve
fathoms high, with a broken and jagged top. Over it a trickling water
dripped, through a wide cleft that seemed to have been carved out
by a fall that had once been strong and full.
‘Indeed things have changed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no mistaking the place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I
remember right, there was a ﬂight of steps cut in the rock at their
side, but the main road wound away left and climbed with several
loops up to the level ground at the top. There used to be a shallow
valley beyond the falls right up to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon ﬂowed through it with the road beside it. Let us go and see what
things are like now!’
They found the stone steps without difﬁculty, and Gimli sprang
swiftly up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached
the top they saw that they could go no further that way, and the
reason for the drying up of the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind
them the sinking Sun ﬁlled the cool western sky with glimmering
gold. Before them stretched a dark still lake. Neither sky nor sunset
was reﬂected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had been dammed
and had ﬁlled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were reared
vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light: ﬁnal and impassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a ﬁssure or crack could Frodo
see in the frowning stone.
‘There are the Walls of Moria,’ said Gandalf, pointing across the
water. ‘And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door
at the end of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this
way is blocked. None of the Company, I guess, will wish to swim
this gloomy water at the end of the day. It has an unwholesome look.’
‘We must ﬁnd a way round the northern edge,’ said Gimli. ‘The
ﬁrst thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the main path
and see where that will lead us. Even if there were no lake, we could
not get our baggage-pony up this stair.’

302

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,’
said Gandalf. ‘The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there
are places narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Frodo. ‘I had not thought of that. And poor
Sam! I wonder what he will say?’
‘I am sorry,’ said Gandalf. ‘Poor Bill has been a useful companion,
and it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled
lighter and brought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond
of, if I had had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged
to take this road.’
The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in
the sky high above the sunset, when the Company, with all the speed
they could, climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake.
In breadth it looked to be no more than two or three furlongs at the
widest point. How far it stretched away southward they could not
see in the failing light; but its northern end was no more than half a
mile from where they stood, and between the stony ridges that
enclosed the valley and the water’s edge there was a rim of open
ground. They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two to go
before they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was
making for; and then he had still to ﬁnd the doors.
When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake they found
a narrow creek that barred their way. It was green and stagnant,
thrust out like a slimy arm towards the enclosing hills. Gimli strode
forward undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more
than ankle-deep at the edge. Behind him they walked in ﬁle, threading
their way with care, for under the weedy pools were sliding and greasy
stones, and footing was treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust
at the touch of the dark unclean water on his feet.
As Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill up on to the dry ground
on the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop,
as if a ﬁsh had disturbed the still surface of the water. Turning quickly
they saw ripples, black-edged with shadow in the waning light: great
rings were widening outwards from a point far out in the lake. There
was a bubbling noise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and the
last gleams of the sunset were veiled in cloud.
Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others followed
as quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry land between
the lake and the cliffs: it was narrow, often hardly a dozen yards
across, and encumbered with fallen rock and stones; but they found
a way, hugging the cliff, and keeping as far from the dark water as
they might. A mile southwards along the shore they came upon holly
trees. Stumps and dead boughs were rotting in the shallows, the

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

303

remains it seemed of old thickets, or of a hedge that had once lined
the road across the drowned valley. But close under the cliff there
stood, still strong and living, two tall trees, larger than any trees of
holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined. Their great roots spread
from the wall to the water. Under the looming cliffs they had looked
like mere bushes, when seen far off from the top of the Stair; but
now they towered overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing deep
night-shadows about their feet, standing like sentinel pillars at the
end of the road.
‘Well, here we are at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘Here the Elven-way from
Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of that land, and they
planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West-door was
made chieﬂy for their use in their trafﬁc with the Lords of Moria. Those
were happier days, when there was still close friendship at times
between folk of different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.’
‘It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned,’
said Gimli.
‘I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,’ said Legolas.
‘I have heard both,’ said Gandalf; ‘and I will not give judgement
now. But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends,
and to help me. I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden,
and the sooner we ﬁnd them the better. Night is at hand!’
Turning to the others he said: ‘While I am searching, will you
each make ready to enter the Mines? For here I fear we must say
farewell to our good beast of burden. You must lay aside much of
the stuff that we brought against bitter weather: you will not need it
inside, nor, I hope, when we come through and journey on down
into the South. Instead each of us must take a share of what the pony
carried, especially the food and the water-skins.’
‘But you can’t leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken place,
Mr. Gandalf !’ cried Sam, angry and distressed. ‘I won’t have it, and
that’s ﬂat. After he has come so far and all!’
‘I am sorry, Sam,’ said the wizard. ‘But when the Door opens I
do not think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long
dark of Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.’
‘He’d follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon’s den, if I led him,’ protested
Sam. ‘It’d be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these
wolves about.’
‘It will be short of murder, I hope,’ said Gandalf. He laid his hand
on the pony’s head, and spoke in a low voice. ‘Go with words of
guard and guiding on you,’ he said. ‘You are a wise beast, and have
learned much in Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can
ﬁnd grass, and so come in time to Elrond’s house, or wherever you
wish to go.

304

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘There, Sam! He will have quite as much chance of escaping wolves
and getting home as we have.’
Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill,
seeming to understand well what was going on, nuzzled up to him,
putting his nose to Sam’s ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled
with the straps, unlading all the pony’s packs and throwing them on
the ground. The others sorted out the goods, making a pile of all
that could be left behind, and dividing up the rest.
When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He appeared
to have done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing
at the blank wall of the cliff, as if he would bore a hole into it with
his eyes. Gimli was wandering about, tapping the stone here and
there with his axe. Legolas was pressed against the rock, as if listening.
‘Well, here we are and all ready,’ said Merry; ‘but where are the
Doors? I can’t see any sign of them.’
‘Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,’ said Gimli.
‘They are invisible, and their own makers cannot ﬁnd them or open
them, if their secret is forgotten.’
‘But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to
Dwarves,’ said Gandalf, coming suddenly to life and turning round.
‘Unless things are altogether changed, eyes that know what to look
for may discover the signs.’
He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow of the
trees there was a smooth space, and over this he passed his hands to
and fro, muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘Can you see anything now?’
The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock; but they
could see nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the surface, where
the wizard’s hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins
of silver running in the stone. At ﬁrst they were no more than pale
gossamer-threads, so ﬁne that they only twinkled ﬁtfully where the
Moon caught them, but steadily they grew broader and clearer, until
their design could be guessed.
At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of interlacing letters in an Elvish character. Below, though the threads were
in places blurred or broken, the outline could be seen of an anvil and
a hammer surmounted by a crown with seven stars. Beneath these
again were two trees, each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than
all else there shone forth in the middle of the door a single star with
many rays.
‘There are the emblems of Durin!’ cried Gimli.
‘And there is the Tree of the High Elves!’ said Legolas.
‘And the Star of the House of Fëanor,’ said Gandalf. ‘They are
wrought of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and

306

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten
in Middle-earth. It is long since I heard them, and I thought deeply
before I could recall them to my mind.’
‘What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying to
decipher the inscription on the arch. ‘I thought I knew the elf-letters,
but I cannot read these.’
‘The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth
in the Elder Days,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But they do not say anything
of importance to us. They say only: The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria.
Speak, friend, and enter. And underneath small and faint is written:
I, Narvi, made them. Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.’
‘What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?’ asked Merry.
‘That is plain enough,’ said Gimli. ‘If you are a friend, speak the
password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘these doors are probably governed by words.
Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular
persons; and some have locks and keys that are still needed when all
necessary times and words are known. These doors have no key. In
the days of Durin they were not secret. They usually stood open and
doorwards sat here. But if they were shut, any who knew the opening
word could speak it and pass in. At least so it is recorded, is it not,
Gimli?’
‘It is,’ said the dwarf. ‘But what the word was is not remembered.
Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.’
‘But do not you know the word, Gandalf ?’ asked Boromir in surprise.
‘No!’ said the wizard.
The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf
well, remained silent and unmoved.
‘Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?’ cried
Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at the dark water. ‘You told
us that you had once passed through the Mines. How could that be,
if you did not know how to enter?’
‘The answer to your ﬁrst question, Boromir,’ said the wizard, ‘is
that I do not know the word – yet. But we shall soon see. And,’ he
added, with a glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, ‘you may
ask what is the use of my deeds when they are proved useless. As for
your other question: do you doubt my tale? Or have you no wits left?
I did not enter this way. I came from the East.
‘If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors open outwards.
From the inside you may thrust them open with your hands. From
the outside nothing will move them save the spell of command. They
cannot be forced inwards.’
‘What are you going to do then?’ asked Pippin, undaunted by the
wizard’s bristling brows.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

307

‘Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,’ said Gandalf.
‘But if that does not shatter them, and I am allowed a little peace
from foolish questions, I will seek for the opening words.
‘I once knew every spell in all the tongues of Elves or Men or
Orcs, that was ever used for such a purpose. I can still remember
ten score of them without searching in my mind. But only a few
trials, I think, will be needed; and I shall not have to call on Gimli
for words of the secret dwarf-tongue that they teach to none. The
opening words were Elvish, like the writing on the arch: that seems
certain.’
He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff
the silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil.
Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen!
Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!
he said in a commanding voice. The silver lines faded, but the blank
grey stone did not stir.
Many times he repeated these words in different order, or varied
them. Then he tried other spells, one after another, speaking now
faster and louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single
words of Elvish speech. Nothing happened. The cliff towered into
the night, the countless stars were kindled, the wind blew cold, and
the doors stood fast.
Again Gandalf approached the wall, and lifting up his arms he
spoke in tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and
struck the rock with his staff. Open, open! he shouted, and followed it
with the same command in every language that had ever been spoken
in the West of Middle-earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground,
and sat down in silence.
At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening ears
the howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang
to his side and whispered softly to him.
‘Do not let him run away!’ said Boromir. ‘It seems that we shall
need him still, if the wolves do not ﬁnd us. How I hate this foul
pool!’ He stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the
dark water.
The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at the same instant there
was a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface
out beyond where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly
towards the foot of the cliff.
‘Why did you do that, Boromir?’ said Frodo. ‘I hate this place,
too, and I am afraid. I don’t know of what: not of wolves, or the

308

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

dark behind the doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool.
Don’t disturb it!’
‘I wish we could get away!’ said Merry.
‘Why doesn’t Gandalf do something quick?’ said Pippin.
Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head bowed,
either in despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the
wolves was heard again. The ripples on the water grew and came
closer; some were already lapping on the shore.
With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang to his
feet. He was laughing! ‘I have it!’ he cried. ‘Of course, of course!
Absurdly simple, like most riddles when you see the answer.’
Picking up his staff he stood before the rock and said in a clear
voice: Mellon!
The star shone out brieﬂy and faded again. Then silently a great
doorway was outlined, though not a crack or joint had been visible
before. Slowly it divided in the middle and swung outwards inch by
inch, until both doors lay back against the wall. Through the opening
a shadowy stair could be seen climbing steeply up; but beyond the
lower steps the darkness was deeper than the night. The Company
stared in wonder.
‘I was wrong after all,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli too. Merry, of all
people, was on the right track. The opening word was inscribed on
the archway all the time! The translation should have been: Say
‘‘Friend’’ and enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend
and the doors opened. Quite simple. Too simple for a learned loremaster in these suspicious days. Those were happier times. Now let
us go!’
He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step. But at that
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by
the ankle, and he fell with a cry. Bill the pony gave a wild neigh of
fear, and turned tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the
darkness. Sam leaped after him, and then hearing Frodo’s cry he ran
back again, weeping and cursing. The others swung round and saw
the waters of the lake seething, as if a host of snakes were swimming
up from the southern end.
Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it was
pale-green and luminous and wet. Its ﬁngered end had hold of
Frodo’s foot, and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees
was now slashing at it with a knife.
The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out
for help. Twenty other arms came rippling out. The dark water
boiled, and there was a hideous stench.
‘Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick!’ shouted Gandalf leaping

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

309

back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all
but Sam to the ground where they stood, he drove them forward.
They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up,
and Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles
writhed across the narrow shore and ﬁngered the cliff-wall and the
doors. One came wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned and paused. If he was considering what word
would close the gate again from within, there was no need. Many
coiling arms seized the doors on either side, and with horrible
strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo they slammed,
and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came dully
through the ponderous stone.
Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collapsed on a step in the black
darkness. ‘Poor old Bill!’ he said in a choking voice. ‘Poor old Bill!
Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to
choose, Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.’
They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his staff
against the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs
trembled, but the doors did not open.
‘Well, well!’ said the wizard. ‘The passage is blocked behind us
now, and there is only one way out – on the other side of the mountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders have been piled up, and
the trees uprooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the
trees were beautiful, and had stood so long.’
‘I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my
foot ﬁrst touched the water,’ said Frodo. ‘What was the thing, or
were there many of them?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf; ‘but the arms were all guided
by one purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark
waters under the mountains. There are older and fouler things than
Orcs in the deep places of the world.’ He did not speak aloud his
thought that whatever it was that dwelt in the lake, it had seized on
Frodo ﬁrst among all the Company.
Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone magniﬁed the sound to a hoarse whisper that all could hear: ‘In the deep
places of the world! And thither we are going against my wish. Who
will lead us now in this deadly dark?’
‘I will,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my
staff !’
As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps, he held his staff
aloft, and from its tip there came a faint radiance. The wide stairway
was sound and undamaged. Two hundred steps they counted, broad

310

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and shallow; and at the top they found an arched passage with a level
ﬂoor leading on into the dark.
‘Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing,
since we can’t ﬁnd a dining-room!’ said Frodo. He had begun to
shake off the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt
extremely hungry.
The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the
upper steps, dim ﬁgures in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf
gave them each a third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell.
‘It will not last much longer, I am afraid,’ he said; ‘but I think we
need it after that horror at the gate. And unless we have great luck,
we shall need all that is left before we see the other side! Go carefully
with the water, too! There are many streams and wells in the Mines,
but they should not be touched. We may not have a chance of ﬁlling
our skins and bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.’
‘How long is that going to take us?’ asked Frodo.
‘I cannot say,’ answered Gandalf. ‘It depends on many chances. But
going straight, without mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or
four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from Westdoor to East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.’
After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were
eager to get the journey over as quickly as possible, and were willing,
tired as they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf
walked in front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering
staff, the light of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his
right he held his sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes
glinting in the dim light as he turned his head from side to side.
Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and he had drawn the short sword,
Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting or of Glamdring; and
that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish smiths in the
Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs were
near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and
the young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and
silent, walked Aragorn.
The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend.
It went steadily down for a long while before it became level once
again. The air grew hot and stiﬂing, but it was not foul, and at
times they felt currents of cooler air upon their faces, issuing from
half-guessed openings in the walls. There were many of these. In the
pale ray of the wizard’s staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and
arches, and of other passages and tunnels, sloping up, or running
steeply down, or opening blankly dark on either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

311

Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage. At
least he was not, as were most of the others, troubled by the mere
darkness in itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where
the choice of way was doubtful; but it was always Gandalf who had
the ﬁnal word. The Mines of Moria were vast and intricate beyond the
imagination of Gimli, Glóin’s son, dwarf of the mountain-race though
he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of a journey long before were
now of little help, but even in the gloom and despite all windings of
the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did not falter, as
long as there was a path that led towards his goal.
‘Do not be afraid!’ said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than
usual, and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together; the others
were crowded behind, waiting anxiously. ‘Do not be afraid! I have
been with him on many a journey, if never on one so dark; and there
are tales in Rivendell of greater deeds of his than any that I have
seen. He will not go astray – if there is any path to ﬁnd. He has led
us in here against our fears, but he will lead us out again, at whatever
cost to himself. He is surer of ﬁnding the way home in a blind night
than the cats of Queen Berúthiel.’
It was well for the Company that they had such a guide. They had
no fuel nor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at
the doors many things had been left behind. But without any light
they would soon have come to grief. There were not only many roads
to choose from, there were also in many places holes and pitfalls,
and dark wells beside the path in which their passing feet echoed.
There were ﬁssures and chasms in the walls and ﬂoor, and every now
and then a crack would open right before their feet. The widest was
more than seven feet across, and it was long before Pippin could
summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap. The noise
of churning water came up from far below, as if some great mill-wheel
was turning in the depths.
‘Rope!’ muttered Sam. ‘I knew I’d want it, if I hadn’t got it!’
As these dangers became more frequent their march became
slower. Already they seemed to have been tramping on, on, endlessly
to the mountains’ roots. They were more than weary, and yet there
seemed no comfort in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo’s spirits
had risen for a while after his escape, and after food and a draught
of the cordial; but now a deep uneasiness, growing to dread, crept
over him again. Though he had been healed in Rivendell of the
knife-stroke, that grim wound had not been without effect. His senses
were sharper and more aware of things that could not be seen. One
sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could see more

312

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in the dark than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And
he was in any case the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain
against his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt
the certainty of evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing.
He gripped tighter on the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly.
The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried
whispers. There was no sound but the sound of their own feet: the
dull stump of Gimli’s dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the light
step of Legolas; the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the
rear the slow ﬁrm footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they
halted for a moment they heard nothing at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear,
or to imagine that he heard, something else: like the faint fall of soft
bare feet. It was never loud enough, or near enough, for him to feel
certain that he heard it; but once it had started it never stopped, while
the Company was moving. But it was not an echo, for when they halted
it pattered on for a little all by itself, and then grew still.
It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines. They had
been going for several hours with only brief halts, when Gandalf
came to his ﬁrst serious check. Before him stood a wide dark arch
opening into three passages: all led in the same general direction,
eastwards; but the left-hand passage plunged down, while the righthand climbed up, and the middle way seemed to run on, smooth
and level but very narrow.
‘I have no memory of this place at all!’ said Gandalf, standing
uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of ﬁnding
some marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of
the kind was to be seen. ‘I am too weary to decide,’ he said, shaking
his head. ‘And I expect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier.
We had better halt here for what is left of the night. You know what
I mean! In here it is ever dark; but outside the late Moon is riding
westward and the middle-night has passed.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Sam. ‘I wonder where he is. I hope those
wolves haven’t got him yet.’
To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it was half
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed
to lie a wide chamber cut in the rock.
‘Steady! Steady!’ cried Gandalf, as Merry and Pippin pushed forward, glad to ﬁnd a place where they could rest with at least more
feeling of shelter than in the open passage. ‘Steady! You do not know
what is inside yet. I will go ﬁrst.’
He went in cautiously, and the others ﬁled behind. ‘There!’ he
said, pointing with his staff to the middle of the ﬂoor. Before his feet

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

313

they saw a large round hole like the mouth of a well. Broken and
rusty chains lay at the edge and trailed down into the black pit.
Fragments of stone lay near.
‘One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you
were going to strike the bottom,’ said Aragorn to Merry. ‘Let the
guide go ﬁrst while you have one.’
‘This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of
the three passages,’ said Gimli. ‘That hole was plainly a well for the
guards’ use, covered with a stone lid. But the lid is broken, and we
must all take care in the dark.’
Pippin felt curiously attracted by the well. While the others were
unrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber,
as far as possible from the hole in the ﬂoor, he crept to the edge and
peered over. A chill air seemed to strike his face, rising from invisible
depths. Moved by a sudden impulse he groped for a loose stone, and
let it drop. He felt his heart beat many times before there was any
sound. Then far below, as if the stone had fallen into deep water in
some cavernous place, there came a plunk, very distant, but magniﬁed
and repeated in the hollow shaft.
‘What’s that?’ cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Pippin confessed what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see his
eye glinting. ‘Fool of a Took!’ he growled. ‘This is a serious journey,
not a hobbit walking-party. Throw yourself in next time, and then
you will be no further nuisance. Now be quiet!’
Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then there came
out of the depths faint knocks: tom-tap, tap-tom. They stopped, and
when the echoes had died away, they were repeated: tap-tom, tom-tap,
tap-tap, tom. They sounded disquietingly like signals of some sort;
but after a while the knocking died away and was not heard again.
‘That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,’
said Gimli.
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I do not like it. It may have nothing to
do with Peregrin’s foolish stone; but probably something has been
disturbed that would have been better left quiet. Pray, do nothing of
the kind again! Let us hope we shall get some rest without further
trouble. You, Pippin, can go on the ﬁrst watch, as a reward,’ he
growled, as he rolled himself in a blanket.
Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he kept on
turning round, fearing that some unknown thing would crawl up out
of the well. He wished he could cover the hole, if only with a blanket,
but he dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed
to be asleep.
Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. He was
deep in thought, trying to recall every memory of his former journey

314

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in the Mines, and considering anxiously the next course that he
should take; a false turn now might be disastrous. After an hour he
rose up and came over to Pippin.
‘Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,’ he said in a kindly
tone. ‘You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so I may as
well do the watching.’
‘I know what is the matter with me,’ he muttered, as he sat down
by the door. ‘I need smoke! I have not tasted it since the morning
before the snowstorm.’
The last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took him, was a dark
glimpse of the old wizard huddled on the ﬂoor, shielding a glowing
chip in his gnarled hands between his knees. The ﬂicker for a moment
showed his sharp nose, and the puff of smoke.
It was Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He had sat and
watched all alone for about six hours, and had let the others rest.
‘And in the watches I have made up my mind,’ he said. ‘I do not
like the feel of the middle way; and I do not like the smell of the
left-hand way: there is foul air down there, or I am no guide. I shall
take the right-hand passage. It is time we began to climb up again.’
For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they marched
on; and they met no danger, and heard nothing, and saw nothing but
the faint gleam of the wizard’s light, bobbing like a will-o’-the-wisp in
front of them. The passage they had chosen wound steadily upwards.
As far as they could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as
it rose it grew loftier and wider. There were now no openings to
other galleries or tunnels on either side, and the ﬂoor was level and
sound, without pits or cracks. Evidently they had struck what once
had been an important road; and they went forward quicker than
they had done on their ﬁrst march.
In this way they advanced some ﬁfteen miles, measured in a direct
line east, though they must have actually walked twenty miles or
more. As the road climbed upwards, Frodo’s spirits rose a little; but
he still felt oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard,
away behind the Company and beyond the fall and patter of their
feet, a following footstep that was not an echo.
They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest,
and all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly
the walls to right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed
through some arched doorway into a black and empty space. There
was a great draught of warmer air behind them, and before them the
darkness was cold on their faces. They halted and crowded anxiously
together.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

315

Gandalf seemed pleased. ‘I chose the right way,’ he said. ‘At last
we are coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far
now from the eastern side. But we are high up, a good deal higher
than the Dimrill Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the
air we must be in a wide hall. I will now risk a little real light.’
He raised his staff, and for a brief instant there was a blaze like a
ﬂash of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and ﬂed, and for a second
they saw a vast roof far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars
hewn of stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty
hall; its black walls, polished and smooth as glass, ﬂashed and glittered.
Three other entrances they saw, dark black arches: one straight before
them eastwards, and one on either side. Then the light went out.
‘That is all that I shall venture on for the present,’ said Gandalf.
‘There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts
leading out to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think
we have reached them now, but it is night outside again, and we
cannot tell until morning. If I am right, tomorrow we may actually
see the morning peeping in. But in the meanwhile we had better go
no further. Let us rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and
the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are not through yet,
and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on the world.’
The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled
close together in a corner to escape the draught: there seemed to be
a steady inﬂow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about
them as they lay hung the darkness, hollow and immense, and they
were oppressed by the loneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and
endlessly branching stairs and passages. The wildest imaginings that
dark rumour had ever suggested to the hobbits fell altogether short
of the actual dread and wonder of Moria.
‘There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one
time,’ said Sam; ‘and every one of them busier than badgers for ﬁve
hundred years to make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did
they do it all for? They didn’t live in these darksome holes surely?’
‘These are not holes,’ said Gimli. ‘This is the great realm and city
of the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, but full of light
and splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.’
He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a deep
voice, while the echoes ran away into the roof.
The world was young, the mountains green,
No stain yet on the Moon was seen,
No words were laid on stream or stone
When Durin woke and walked alone.

316

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He named the nameless hills and dells;
He drank from yet untasted wells;
He stooped and looked in Mirrormere,
And saw a crown of stars appear,
As gems upon a silver thread,
Above the shadow of his head.
The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have passed away:
The world was fair in Durin’s Day.
A king he was on carven throne
In many-pillared halls of stone
With golden roof and silver ﬂoor,
And runes of power upon the door.
The light of sun and star and moon
In shining lamps of crystal hewn
Undimmed by cloud or shade of night
There shone for ever fair and bright.
There hammer on the anvil smote,
There chisel clove, and graver wrote;
There forged was blade, and bound was hilt;
The delver mined, the mason built.
There beryl, pearl, and opal pale,
And metal wrought like ﬁshes’ mail,
Buckler and corslet, axe and sword,
And shining spears were laid in hoard.
Unwearied then were Durin’s folk;
Beneath the mountains music woke:
The harpers harped, the minstrels sang,
And at the gates the trumpets rang.
The world is grey, the mountains old,
The forge’s ﬁre is ashen-cold;
No harp is wrung, no hammer falls:
The darkness dwells in Durin’s halls;
The shadow lies upon his tomb
In Moria, in Khazad-dûm.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

317

But still the sunken stars appear
In dark and windless Mirrormere;
There lies his crown in water deep,
Till Durin wakes again from sleep.
‘I like that!’ said Sam. ‘I should like to learn it. In Moria, in
Khazad-dûm! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking of all
those lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still?’
Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more.
‘Piles of jewels?’ said Gandalf. ‘No. The Orcs have often plundered
Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves
ﬂed, no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep
places: they are drowned in water – or in a shadow of fear.’
‘Then what do the dwarves want to come back for?’ asked Sam.
‘For mithril,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The wealth of Moria was not in
gold and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant.
Such things they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did
not need to delve for them: all things that they desired they could
obtain in trafﬁc. For here alone in the world was found Moria-silver,
or true-silver as some have called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The
Dwarves have a name which they do not tell. Its worth was ten times
that of gold, and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground,
and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. The lodes lead away
north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The Dwarves tell
no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their wealth, so
also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too deep,
and disturbed that from which they ﬂed, Durin’s Bane. Of what they
brought to light the Orcs have gathered nearly all, and given it in
tribute to Sauron, who covets it.
‘Mithril! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper, and
polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light
and yet harder than tempered steel. Its beauty was like to that of
common silver, but the beauty of mithril did not tarnish or grow dim.
The Elves dearly loved it, and among many uses they made of it
ithildin, starmoon, which you saw upon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet
of mithril-rings that Thorin gave him. I wonder what has become of
it? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving Mathom-house, I suppose.’
‘What?’ cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. ‘A corslet of Moriasilver? That was a kingly gift!’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I never told him, but its worth was greater
than the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.’
Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and
touched the rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he
had been walking about with the price of the Shire under his jacket.

318

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Had Bilbo known? He felt no doubt that Bilbo knew quite well. It
was indeed a kingly gift. But now his thoughts had been carried away
from the dark Mines, to Rivendell, to Bilbo, and to Bag End in the
days while Bilbo was still there. He wished with all his heart that he
was back there, and in those days, mowing the lawn, or pottering
among the ﬂowers, and that he had never heard of Moria, or mithril
– or the Ring.
A deep silence fell. One by one the others fell asleep. Frodo was
on guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors
out of deep places, dread came over him. His hands were cold and
his brow damp. He listened. All his mind was given to listening and
nothing else for two slow hours; but he heard no sound, not even
the imagined echo of a footfall.
His watch was nearly over, when, far off where he guessed that
the western archway stood, he fancied that he could see two pale
points of light, almost like luminous eyes. He started. His head had
nodded. ‘I must have nearly fallen asleep on guard,’ he thought. ‘I
was on the edge of a dream.’ He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and
remained standing, peering into the dark, until he was relieved by
Legolas.
When he lay down he quickly went to sleep, but it seemed to him
that the dream went on: he heard whispers, and saw the two pale
points of light approaching, slowly. He woke and found that the
others were speaking softly near him, and that a dim light was falling
on his face. High up above the eastern archway through a shaft near
the roof came a long pale gleam; and across the hall through the
northern arch light also glimmered faint and distantly.
Frodo sat up. ‘Good morning!’ said Gandalf. ‘For morning it is
again at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side
of Moria. Before today is over we ought to ﬁnd the Great Gates and
see the waters of Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.’
‘I shall be glad,’ said Gimli. ‘I have looked on Moria, and it is
very great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found
no sign of my kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.’
After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once.
‘We are tired, but we shall rest better when we are outside,’ he said.
‘I think that none of us will wish to spend another night in
Moria.’
‘No indeed!’ said Boromir. ‘Which way shall we take? Yonder
eastward arch?’
‘Maybe,’ said Gandalf. ‘But I do not know yet exactly where we
are. Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are above and to the

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

319

north of the Great Gates; and it may not be easy to ﬁnd the right
road down to them. The eastern arch will probably prove to be the
way that we must take; but before we make up our minds we ought
to look about us. Let us go towards that light in the north door. If
we could ﬁnd a window it would help, but I fear that the light comes
only down deep shafts.’
Following his lead the Company passed under the northern arch.
They found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the
glimmer grew stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway
on their right. It was high and ﬂat-topped, and the stone door was
still upon its hinges, standing half open. Beyond it was a large square
chamber. It was dimly lit, but to their eyes, after so long a time in
the dark, it seemed dazzlingly bright, and they blinked as they entered.
Their feet disturbed a deep dust upon the ﬂoor, and stumbled
among things lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at
ﬁrst make out. The chamber was lit by a wide shaft high in the further
eastern wall; it slanted upwards and, far above, a small square patch
of blue sky could be seen. The light of the shaft fell directly on a
table in the middle of the room: a single oblong block, about two
feet high, upon which was laid a great slab of white stone.
‘It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards with a
curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. Gandalf came
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven:

320

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘These are Daeron’s Runes, such as were used of old in Moria,’
said Gandalf. ‘Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:
balin son of fundin
lord of moria.’
‘He is dead then,’ said Frodo. ‘I feared it was so.’ Gimli cast his
hood over his face.

Chapter 5
ˆ M
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU
The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin.
Frodo thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with the dwarf, and
of Balin’s visit to the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the
mountains it seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of
the world.
At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search for
anything that would give them tidings of Balin’s fate, or show what
had become of his folk. There was another smaller door on the other
side of the chamber, under the shaft. By both the doors they could
now see that many bones were lying, and among them were broken
swords and axe-heads, and cloven shields and helms. Some of the
swords were crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades.
There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them
were large iron-bound chests of wood. All had been broken and
plundered; but beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains
of a book. It had been slashed and stabbed and partly burned, and
it was so stained with black and other dark marks like old blood that
little of it could be read. Gandalf lifted it carefully, but the leaves
cracked and broke as he laid it on the slab. He pored over it for some
time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli standing at his side could
see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they were written by many
different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale, and here and
there in Elvish script.
At last Gandalf looked up. ‘It seems to be a record of the fortunes
of Balin’s folk,’ he said. ‘I guess that it began with their coming to
Dimrill Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the pages seem to have numbers
referring to the years after their arrival. The top page is marked one
– three, so at least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!
‘We drove out orcs from the great gate and guard – I think; the next
word is blurred and burned: probably room – we slew many in the
bright – I think – sun in the dale. Flói was killed by an arrow. He slew
the great. Then there is a blur followed by Flói under grass near Mirror
mere. The next line or two I cannot read. Then comes We have taken
the twentyﬁrst hall of North end to dwell in. There is I cannot read what.
A shaft is mentioned. Then Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of
Mazarbul.’
‘The Chamber of Records,’ said Gimli. ‘I guess that is where we
now stand.’

322

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Well, I can read no more for a long way,’ said Gandalf, ‘except
the word gold, and Durin’s Axe and something helm. Then Balin is
now lord of Moria. That seems to end a chapter. After some stars
another hand begins, and I can see we found truesilver, and later the
word wellforged, and then something, I have it! mithril; and the last
´ to seek for the upper armouries of Third Deep, something
two lines Oin
go westwards, a blur, to Hollin gate.’
Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. ‘There are several pages
of the same sort, rather hastily written and much damaged,’ he said;
‘but I can make little of them in this light. Now there must be a
number of leaves missing, because they begin to be numbered ﬁve,
the ﬁfth year of the colony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too
cut and stained; I cannot read them. We might do better in the
sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a large bold hand using an Elvish
script.’
‘That would be Ori’s hand,’ said Gimli, looking over the wizard’s
arm. ‘He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish
characters.’
‘I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,’ said Gandalf.
‘The ﬁrst clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless
it ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre followed by day being the tenth
of novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to
look in Mirror mere. an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc,
but many more ... up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the
page is so blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think
I can read we have barred the gates, and then can hold them long if,
and then perhaps horrible and suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have
kept the title that he took for less than ﬁve years. I wonder what
happened afterwards; but there is no time to puzzle out the last few
pages. Here is the last page of all.’ He paused and sighed.
‘It is grim reading,’ he said. ‘I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We
cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken the Bridge and second
hall. Frár and Lóni and Náli fell there. Then there are four lines
smeared so that I can only read went 5 days ago. The last lines run
the pool is up to the wall at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took
´
Oin.
We cannot get out. The end comes, and then drums, drums in the
deep. I wonder what that means. The last thing written is in a trailing
scrawl of elf-letters: they are coming. There is nothing more.’ Gandalf
paused and stood in silent thought.
A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the Company.
‘We cannot get out,’ muttered Gimli. ‘It was well for us that the pool
had sunk a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the
southern end.’

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

323

Gandalf raised his head and looked round. ‘They seem to have
made a last stand by both doors,’ he said; ‘but there were not many
left by that time. So ended the attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant
but foolish. The time is not come yet. Now, I fear, we must say
farewell to Balin son of Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his
fathers. We will take this book, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at
it more closely later. You had better keep it, Gimli, and take it back
to Dáin, if you get a chance. It will interest him, though it will grieve
him deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.’
‘Which way shall we go?’ asked Boromir.
‘Back to the hall,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But our visit to this room
has not been in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as
Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the
twenty-ﬁrst of the North-end. Therefore we should leave by the
eastern arch of the hall, and bear right and south, and go downwards.
The Twenty-ﬁrst Hall should be on the Seventh Level, that is six
above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall!’
Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came a great
noise: a rolling Boom that seemed to come from depths far below,
and to tremble in the stone at their feet. They sprang towards the
door in alarm. Doom, doom it rolled again, as if huge hands were
turning the very caverns of Moria into a vast drum. Then there came
an echoing blast: a great horn was blown in the hall, and answering
horns and harsh cries were heard further off. There was a hurrying
sound of many feet.
‘They are coming!’ cried Legolas.
‘We cannot get out,’ said Gimli.
‘Trapped!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Why did I delay? Here we are, caught,
just as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see
what——’
Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook.
‘Slam the doors and wedge them!’ shouted Aragorn. ‘And keep
your packs on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our
way out yet.’
‘No!’ said Gandalf. ‘We must not get shut in. Keep the east door
ajar! We will go that way, if we get a chance.’
Another harsh horn-call and shrill cries rang out. Feet were coming
down the corridor. There was a ring and clatter as the Company
drew their swords. Glamdring shone with a pale light, and Sting
glinted at the edges. Boromir set his shoulder against the western
door.
‘Wait a moment! Do not close it yet!’ said Gandalf. He sprang
forward to Boromir’s side and drew himself up to his full height.

324

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria?’ he
cried in a loud voice.
There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding stones
into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command.
Doom, boom, doom went the drums in the deep.
With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the narrow opening of the door and thrust forward his staff. There was a dazzling
ﬂash that lit the chamber and the passage outside. For an instant the
wizard looked out. Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor
as he sprang back.
‘There are Orcs, very many of them,’ he said. ‘And some are large
and evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging
back, but there is something else there. A great cave-troll, I think,
or more than one. There is no hope of escape that way.’
‘And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,’ said
Boromir.
‘There is no sound outside here yet,’ said Aragorn, who was standing by the eastern door listening. ‘The passage on this side plunges
straight down a stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall.
But it is no good ﬂying blindly this way with the pursuit just behind.
We cannot block the door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken,
and it opens inwards. We must do something to delay the enemy
ﬁrst. We will make them fear the Chamber of Mazarbul!’ he said
grimly, feeling the edge of his sword, Andúril.
Heavy feet were heard in the corridor. Boromir ﬂung himself
against the door and heaved it to; then he wedged it with broken
sword-blades and splinters of wood. The Company retreated to the
other side of the chamber. But they had no chance to ﬂy yet. There
was a blow on the door that made it quiver; and then it began to
grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A huge arm and shoulder,
with a dark skin of greenish scales, was thrust through the widening
gap. Then a great, ﬂat, toeless foot was forced through below. There
was a dead silence outside.
Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might;
but his sword rang, glanced aside, and fell from his shaken hand.
The blade was notched.
Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a hot wrath blaze
up in his heart. ‘The Shire!’ he cried, and springing beside Boromir,
he stooped, and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was
a bellow, and the foot jerked back, nearly wrenching Sting from
Frodo’s arm. Black drops dripped from the blade and smoked on
the ﬂoor. Boromir hurled himself against the door and slammed it
again.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

325

‘One for the Shire!’ cried Aragorn. ‘The hobbit’s bite is deep! You
have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo!’
There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams
and hammers were beating against it. It cracked and staggered back,
and the opening grew suddenly wide. Arrows came whistling in, but
struck the northern wall, and fell harmlessly to the ﬂoor. There was
a horn-blast and a rush of feet, and orcs one after another leaped
into the chamber.
How many there were the Company could not count. The affray
was sharp, but the orcs were dismayed by the ﬁerceness of the
defence. Legolas shot two through the throat. Gimli hewed the legs
from under another that had sprung up on Balin’s tomb. Boromir and
Aragorn slew many. When thirteen had fallen the rest ﬂed shrieking,
leaving the defenders unharmed, except for Sam who had a scratch
along the scalp. A quick duck had saved him; and he had felled his
orc: a sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A ﬁre was smouldering
in his brown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman step backwards, if he had seen it.
‘Now is the time!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Let us go, before the troll
returns!’
But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had
reached the stair outside, a huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad
in black mail from head to foot, leaped into the chamber; behind
him his followers clustered in the doorway. His broad ﬂat face was
swart, his eyes were like coals, and his tongue was red; he wielded a
great spear. With a thrust of his huge hide shield he turned Boromir’s
sword and bore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Diving
under Aragorn’s blow with the speed of a striking snake he charged
into the Company and thrust with his spear straight at Frodo. The
blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo was hurled against the
wall and pinned. Sam, with a cry, hacked at the spear-shaft, and it
broke. But even as the orc ﬂung down the truncheon and swept out
his scimitar, Andúril came down upon his helm. There was a ﬂash
like ﬂame and the helm burst asunder. The orc fell with cloven
head. His followers ﬂed howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at
them.
Doom, doom went the drums in the deep. The great voice rolled
out again.
‘Now!’ shouted Gandalf. ‘Now is the last chance. Run for it!’
Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and made for
the stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in front of him. The others
followed; but Gimli had to be dragged away by Legolas: in spite of
the peril he lingered by Balin’s tomb with his head bowed. Boromir

326

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

hauled the eastern door to, grinding upon its hinges: it had great iron
rings on either side, but could not be fastened.
‘I am all right,’ gasped Frodo. ‘I can walk. Put me down!’
Aragorn nearly dropped him in his amazement. ‘I thought you
were dead!’ he cried.
‘Not yet!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no time for wonder. Off you
go, all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the
bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose
paths leading right and downwards.’
‘We cannot leave you to hold the door alone!’ said Aragorn.
‘Do as I say!’ said Gandalf ﬁercely. ‘Swords are no more use here.
Go!’
The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped
their way down a long ﬂight of steps, and then looked back; but they
could see nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer of the
wizard’s staff. He seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed
door. Frodo breathed heavily and leaned against Sam, who put his
arms about him. They stood peering up the stairs into the darkness.
Frodo thought he could hear the voice of Gandalf above, muttering
words that ran down the sloping roof with a sighing echo. He could
not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be trembling. Every
now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom, doom.
Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white light.
Then there was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats
broke out wildly: doom-boom, doom-boom, and then stopped. Gandalf
came ﬂying down the steps and fell to the ground in the midst of the
Company.
‘Well, well! That’s over!’ said the wizard struggling to his feet. ‘I
have done all that I could. But I have met my match, and have nearly
been destroyed. But don’t stand here! Go on! You will have to do
without light for a while: I am rather shaken. Go on! Go on! Where
are you, Gimli? Come ahead with me! Keep close behind, all of you!’
They stumbled after him wondering what had happened. Doom,
doom went the drum-beats again: they now sounded mufﬂed and far
away, but they were following. There was no other sound of pursuit,
neither tramp of feet, nor any voice. Gandalf took no turns, right or
left, for the passage seemed to be going in the direction that he
desired. Every now and again it descended a ﬂight of steps, ﬁfty or
more, to a lower level. At the moment that was their chief danger;
for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they came on it
and put their feet out into emptiness. Gandalf felt the ground with
his staff like a blind man.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

327

At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little
more, and had descended many ﬂights of stairs. There was still no
sound of pursuit. Almost they began to hope that they would escape.
At the bottom of the seventh ﬂight Gandalf halted.
‘It is getting hot!’ he gasped. ‘We ought to be down at least to the
level of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look for a left-hand
turn to take us east. I hope it is not far. I am very weary. I must rest
here a moment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.’
Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the step.
‘What happened away up there at the door?’ he asked. ‘Did you meet
the beater of the drums?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I found myself suddenly
faced by something that I have not met before. I could think of
nothing to do but to try and put a shutting-spell on the door. I know
many; but to do things of that kind rightly requires time, and even
then the door can be broken by strength.
‘As I stood there I could hear orc-voices on the other side: at any
moment I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear what
was said; they seemed to be talking in their own hideous language.
All I caught was ghâsh: that is ‘‘ﬁre’’. Then something came into the
chamber – I felt it through the door, and the orcs themselves were
afraid and fell silent. It laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived
me and my spell.
‘What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a challenge.
The counter-spell was terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the
door left my control and began to open! I had to speak a word of
Command. That proved too great a strain. The door burst in pieces.
Something dark as a cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and
I was thrown backwards down the stairs. All the wall gave way, and
the roof of the chamber as well, I think.
‘I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something else is
buried there too. I cannot say. But at least the passage behind us
was completely blocked. Ah! I have never felt so spent, but it is
passing. And now what about you, Frodo? There was not time to
say so, but I have never been more delighted in my life than when
you spoke. I feared that it was a brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn
was carrying.’
‘What about me?’ said Frodo. ‘I am alive, and whole I think. I am
bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.’
‘Well,’ said Aragorn, ‘I can only say that hobbits are made of a
stuff so tough that I have never met the like of it. Had I known, I
would have spoken softer in the Inn at Bree! That spear-thrust would
have skewered a wild boar!’
‘Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,’ said Frodo; ‘though

328

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

I feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.’ He
said no more. He found breathing painful.
‘You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘There is more about you
than meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if
the remark meant more than it said.
They now went on again. Before long Gimli spoke. He had keen
eyes in the dark. ‘I think,’ he said, ‘that there is a light ahead. But it
is not daylight. It is red. What can it be?’
‘Ghâsh!’ muttered Gandalf. ‘I wonder if that is what they meant:
that the lower levels are on ﬁre? Still, we can only go on.’
Soon the light became unmistakable, and could be seen by all. It
was ﬂickering and glowing on the walls away down the passage before
them. They could now see their way: in front the road sloped down
swiftly, and some way ahead there stood a low archway; through it
the growing light came. The air became very hot.
When they came to the arch Gandalf went through, signing to
them to wait. As he stood just beyond the opening they saw his face
lit by a red glow. Quickly he stepped back.
‘There is some new devilry here,’ he said, ‘devised for our welcome,
no doubt. But I know now where we are: we have reached the First
Deep, the level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second
Hall of Old Moria; and the Gates are near: away beyond the eastern
end, on the left, not more than a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge,
up a broad stair, along a wide road, through the First Hall, and out!
But come and look!’
They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was
loftier and far longer than the one in which they had slept. They
were near its eastern end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down
the centre stalked a double line of towering pillars. They were carved
like boles of mighty trees whose boughs upheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems were smooth and black, but a red
glow was darkly mirrored in their sides. Right across the ﬂoor, close
to the feet of two huge pillars a great ﬁssure had opened. Out of it
a ﬁerce red light came, and now and again ﬂames licked at the brink
and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps of dark smoke
wavered in the hot air.
‘If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we
should have been trapped here,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us hope that the ﬁre
now lies between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.’
Even as he spoke they heard again the pursuing drum-beat: Doom,
doom, doom. Away beyond the shadows at the western end of the hall
there came cries and horn-calls. Doom, doom: the pillars seemed to
tremble and the ﬂames to quiver.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

329

‘Now for the last race!’ said Gandalf. ‘If the sun is shining outside,
we may still escape. After me!’
He turned left and sped across the smooth ﬂoor of the hall. The
distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the
beat and echo of many hurrying feet behind. A shrill yell went up:
they had been seen. There was a ring and clash of steel. An arrow
whistled over Frodo’s head.
Boromir laughed. ‘They did not expect this,’ he said. ‘The ﬁre
has cut them off. We are on the wrong side!’
‘Look ahead!’ called Gandalf. ‘The Bridge is near. lt is dangerous
and narrow.’
Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the
hall the ﬂoor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. The outer door
could only be reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or
rail, that spanned the chasm with one curving spring of ﬁfty feet. It
was an ancient defence of the Dwarves against any enemy that might
capture the First Hall and the outer passages. They could only pass
across it in single ﬁle. At the brink Gandalf halted and the others
came up in a pack behind.
‘Lead the way, Gimli!’ he said. ‘Pippin and Merry next. Straight
on, and up the stair beyond the door!’
Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang back.
Another pierced Gandalf ’s hat and stuck there like a black feather.
Frodo looked behind. Beyond the ﬁre he saw swarming black ﬁgures:
there seemed to be hundreds of orcs. They brandished spears and
scimitars which shone red as blood in the ﬁrelight. Doom, doom rolled
the drum-beats, growing louder and louder, doom, doom.
Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it was a long
shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow
slipped to the ground. He gave a cry of dismay and fear. Two great
trolls appeared; they bore great slabs of stone, and ﬂung them down
to serve as gangways over the ﬁre. But it was not the trolls that had
ﬁlled the Elf with terror. The ranks of the orcs had opened, and they
crowded away, as if they themselves were afraid. Something was
coming up behind them. What it was could not be seen: it was like
a great shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form, of man-shape
maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to be in it and
to go before it.
It came to the edge of the ﬁre and the light faded as if a cloud
had bent over it. Then with a rush it leaped across the ﬁssure. The
ﬂames roared up to greet it, and wreathed about it; and a black smoke
swirled in the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it.
In its right hand was a blade like a stabbing tongue of ﬁre; in its left
it held a whip of many thongs.

330

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Ai! ai!’ wailed Legolas. ‘A Balrog! A Balrog is come!’
Gimli stared with wide eyes. ‘Durin’s Bane!’ he cried, and letting
his axe fall he covered his face.
‘A Balrog,’ muttered Gandalf. ‘Now I understand.’ He faltered
and leaned heavily on his staff. ‘What an evil fortune! And I am
already weary.’
The dark ﬁgure streaming with ﬁre raced towards them. The orcs
yelled and poured over the stone gangways. Then Boromir raised his
horn and blew. Loud the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout
of many throats under the cavernous roof. For a moment the orcs
quailed and the ﬁery shadow halted. Then the echoes died as suddenly as a ﬂame blown out by a dark wind, and the enemy advanced
again.
‘Over the bridge!’ cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. ‘Fly! This
is a foe beyond any of you. I must hold the narrow way. Fly!’ Aragorn
and Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground,
side by side, behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others
halted just within the doorway at the hall’s end, and turned, unable
to leave their leader to face the enemy alone.
The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of
the span, leaning on the staff in his left hand, but in his other hand
Glamdring gleamed, cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing
him, and the shadow about it reached out like two vast wings. It
raised the whip, and the thongs whined and cracked. Fire came from
its nostrils. But Gandalf stood ﬁrm.
‘You cannot pass,’ he said. The orcs stood still, and a dead silence
fell. ‘I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the ﬂame of Anor.
You cannot pass. The dark ﬁre will not avail you, ﬂame of Udûn.
Go back to the Shadow! You cannot pass.’
The Balrog made no answer. The ﬁre in it seemed to die, but the
darkness grew. It stepped forward slowly on to the bridge, and suddenly it drew itself up to a great height, and its wings were spread
from wall to wall; but still Gandalf could be seen, glimmering in the
gloom; he seemed small, and altogether alone: grey and bent, like a
wizened tree before the onset of a storm.
From out of the shadow a red sword leaped ﬂaming.
Glamdring glittered white in answer.
There was a ringing clash and a stab of white ﬁre. The Balrog fell
back, and its sword ﬂew up in molten fragments. The wizard swayed
on the bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still.
‘You cannot pass!’ he said.
With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge. Its whip
whirled and hissed.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

331

‘He cannot stand alone!’ cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back
along the bridge. ‘Elendil! ’ he shouted. ‘I am with you, Gandalf !’
‘Gondor!’ cried Boromir and leaped after him.
At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote
the bridge before him. The staff broke asunder and fell from his
hand. A blinding sheet of white ﬂame sprang up. The bridge cracked.
Right at the Balrog’s feet it broke, and the stone upon which it stood
crashed into the gulf, while the rest remained, poised, quivering like
a tongue of rock thrust out into emptiness.
With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow plunged
down and vanished. But even as it fell it swung its whip, and the
thongs lashed and curled about the wizard’s knees, dragging him to
the brink. He staggered and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid
into the abyss. ‘Fly, you fools!’ he cried, and was gone.
The ﬁres went out, and blank darkness fell. The Company stood
rooted with horror staring into the pit. Even as Aragorn and Boromir
came ﬂying back, the rest of the bridge cracked and fell. With a cry
Aragorn roused them.
‘Come! I will lead you now!’ he called. ‘We must obey his last
command. Follow me!’
They stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door, Aragorn
leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide echoing passage.
Along this they ﬂed. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then
he found that he himself was weeping as he ran. Doom, doom, doom
the drum-beats rolled behind, mournful now and slow; doom!
They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the
roof. They ran swifter. They passed into a hall, bright with daylight
from its high windows in the east. They ﬂed across it. Through its
huge broken doors they passed, and suddenly before them the Great
Gates opened, an arch of blazing light.
There was a guard of orcs crouching in the shadows behind the great
door-posts towering on either side, but the gates were shattered and
cast down. Aragorn smote to the ground the captain that stood in his
path, and the rest ﬂed in terror of his wrath. The Company swept past
them and took no heed of them. Out of the Gates they ran and sprang
down the huge and age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria.
Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the
wind on their faces.
They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the walls.
Dimrill Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains
lay upon it, but eastwards there was a golden light on the land. It
was but one hour after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were
white and high.

332

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

They looked back. Dark yawned the archway of the Gates under
the mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow
drum-beats: doom. A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was
to be seen; the dale all around was empty. Doom. Grief at last wholly
overcame them, and they wept long: some standing and silent, some
cast upon the ground. Doom, doom. The drum-beats faded.

Chapter 6
´ RIEN
LOTHLO
‘Alas! I fear we cannot stay here longer,’ said Aragorn. He looked
towards the mountains and held up his sword. ‘Farewell, Gandalf !’
he cried. ‘Did I not say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware?
Alas that I spoke true! What hope have we without you?’
He turned to the Company. ‘We must do without hope,’ he said.
‘At least we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no
more! Come! We have a long road, and much to do.’
They rose and looked about them. Northward the dale ran up
into a glen of shadows between two great arms of the mountains,
above which three white peaks were shining: Celebdil, Fanuidhol,
Caradhras, the Mountains of Moria. At the head of the glen a torrent
ﬂowed like a white lace over an endless ladder of short falls, and a
mist of foam hung in the air about the mountains’ feet.
‘Yonder is the Dimrill Stair,’ said Aragorn, pointing to the falls.
‘Down the deep-cloven way that climbs beside the torrent we should
have come, if fortune had been kinder.’
‘Or Caradhras less cruel,’ said Gimli. ‘There he stands smiling in
the sun!’ He shook his ﬁst at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks
and turned away.
To the east the outﬂung arm of the mountains marched to a
sudden end, and far lands could be descried beyond them, wide and
vague. To the south the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far
as sight could reach. Less than a mile away, and a little below them,
for they still stood high up on the west side of the dale, there lay a
mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a great spear-head thrust
deep into the northern glen; but its southern end was beyond the
shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a deep blue
like clear evening sky seen from a lamp-lit room. Its face was still
and unrufﬂed. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all
sides to its bare unbroken rim.
‘There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zâram!’ said Gimli sadly.
‘I remember that he said: ‘‘May you have joy of the sight! But we
cannot linger there.’’ Now long shall I journey ere I have joy again.
It is I that must hasten away, and he that must remain.’
The Company now went down the road from the Gates. It was
rough and broken, fading to a winding track between heather and
whin that thrust amid the cracking stones. But still it could be seen

334

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

that once long ago a great paved way had wound upwards from the
lowlands to the Dwarf-kingdom. In places there were ruined works
of stone beside the path, and mounds of green topped with slender
birches, or ﬁr-trees sighing in the wind. An eastward bend led them
hard by the sward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the roadside
stood a single column broken at the top.
‘That is Durin’s Stone!’ cried Gimli. ‘I cannot pass without turning
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale!’
‘Be swift then!’ said Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.
‘The Sun sinks early. The Orcs will not, maybe, come out till after
dusk, but we must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost
spent, and it will be dark tonight.’
‘Come with me, Frodo!’ cried the dwarf, springing from the road.
‘I would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zâram.’ He ran down
the long green slope. Frodo followed slowly, drawn by the still blue
water in spite of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind.
Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It was
cracked and weather-worn, and the faint runes upon its side could
not be read. ‘This pillar marks the spot where Durin ﬁrst looked in
the Mirrormere,’ said the dwarf. ‘Let us look ourselves once, ere
we go!’
They stooped over the dark water. At ﬁrst they could see nothing.
Then slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored
in a profound blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white ﬂame
above them; beyond there was a space of sky. There like jewels sunk
in the deep shone glinting stars, though sunlight was in the sky above.
Of their own stooping forms no shadow could be seen.
‘O Kheled-zâram fair and wonderful!’ said Gimli. ‘There lies the
Crown of Durin till he wakes. Farewell!’ He bowed, and turned away,
and hastened back up the greensward to the road again.
‘What did you see?’ said Pippin to Sam, but Sam was too deep in
thought to answer.
The road now turned south and went quickly downwards, running
out from between the arms of the dale. Some way below the mere
they came on a deep well of water, clear as crystal, from which a
freshet fell over a stone lip and ran glistening and gurgling down a
steep rocky channel.
‘Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises,’ said Gimli.
‘Do not drink of it! It is icy cold.’
‘Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many
other mountain-streams,’ said Aragorn. ‘Our road leads beside it for
many miles. For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose, and
ﬁrst I hope to come to the woods where the Silverlode ﬂows into the

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

335

Great River – out yonder.’ They looked as he pointed, and before
them they could see the stream leaping down to the trough of the
valley, and then running on and away into the lower lands, until it
was lost in a golden haze.
‘There lie the woods of Lothlórien!’ said Legolas. ‘That is the
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the
trees of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn
to gold. Not till the spring comes and the new green opens do they
fall, and then the boughs are laden with yellow ﬂowers; and the ﬂoor
of the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillars are of
silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs
in Mirkwood say. My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves
of that wood, and it were springtime!’
‘My heart will be glad, even in the winter,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it
lies many miles away. Let us hasten!’
For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the
others; but Aragorn was leading them at a great pace, and after a
while they lagged behind. They had eaten nothing since the early
morning. Sam’s cut was burning like ﬁre, and his head felt light. In
spite of the shining sun the wind seemed chill after the warm darkness
of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt every step more painful and he
gasped for breath.
At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind, he spoke
to Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to
Boromir to come with him.
‘I am sorry, Frodo!’ he cried, full of concern. ‘So much has happened this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten
that you were hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have
done nothing to ease you, as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria
were after us. Come now! A little further on there is a place where
we can rest for a little. There I will do what I can for you. Come,
Boromir! We will carry them.’
Soon afterwards they came upon another stream that ran down
from the west, and joined its bubbling water with the hurrying
Silverlode. Together they plunged over a fall of green-hued stone,
and foamed down into a dell. About it stood ﬁr-trees, short and bent,
and its sides were steep and clothed with harts-tongue and shrubs of
whortle-berry. At the bottom there was a level space through which
the stream ﬂowed noisily over shining pebbles. Here they rested. It
was now nearly three hours after noon, and they had come only a
few miles from the Gates. Already the sun was westering.
While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a ﬁre of brushand ﬁr-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam’s

336

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

wound was not deep, but it looked ugly, and Aragorn’s face was
grave as he examined it. After a moment he looked up with relief.
‘Good luck, Sam!’ he said. ‘Many have received worse than this
in payment for the slaying of their ﬁrst orc. The cut is not poisoned,
as the wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should heal well when
I have tended it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.’
He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves. ‘They
are dry, and some of their virtue has gone,’ he said, ‘but here I have
still some of the leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weathertop.
Crush one in the water, and wash the wound clean, and I will bind
it. Now it is your turn, Frodo!’
‘I am all right,’ said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments touched.
‘All I needed was some food and a little rest.’
‘No!’ said Aragorn. ‘We must have a look and see what the hammer
and the anvil have done to you. I still marvel that you are alive at
all.’ Gently he stripped off Frodo’s old jacket and worn tunic, and
gave a gasp of wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered before his eyes like the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully
he took it off and held it up, and the gems on it glittered like stars,
and the sound of the shaken rings was like the tinkle of rain in a
pool.
‘Look, my friends!’ he called. ‘Here’s a pretty hobbit-skin to wrap
an elven-princeling in! If it were known that hobbits had such hides,
all the hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.’
‘And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in
vain,’ said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. ‘It is a mithril-coat.
Mithril! I have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat
that Gandalf spoke of ? Then he undervalued it. But it was well
given!’
‘I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close
in his little room,’ said Merry. ‘Bless the old hobbit! I love him more
than ever. I hope we get a chance of telling him about it!’
There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo’s right side and
breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one
point the rings had been driven through it into the ﬂesh. Frodo’s left
side also was scored and bruised where he had been hurled against
the wall. While the others set the food ready, Aragorn bathed the
hurts with water in which athelas was steeped. The pungent fragrance
ﬁlled the dell, and all those who stooped over the steaming water felt
refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the pain leave him, and
his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and sore to the touch for
many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.
‘The mail is marvellously light,’ he said. ‘Put it on again, if you
can bear it. My heart is glad to know that you have such a coat. Do

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

355

own tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon
his face.
‘Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire!’ said Celeborn.
‘When all have come we will speak together.’
Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name as they
entered. ‘Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn!’ he said. ‘It is eight and
thirty years of the world outside since you came to this land; and
those years lie heavy on you. But the end is near, for good or ill.
Here lay aside your burden for a while!’
‘Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey
hither from the North.’
‘Welcome Gimli son of Glóin! It is long indeed since we saw one
of Durin’s folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our
long law. May it be a sign that though the world is now dark better
days are at hand, and that friendship shall be renewed between our
peoples.’ Gimli bowed low.
When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord looked
at them again. ‘Here there are eight,’ he said. ‘Nine were to set out:
so said the messages. But maybe there has been some change of
counsel that we have not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness
gathers between us, and all this year the shadows have grown longer.’
‘Nay, there was no change of counsel,’ said the Lady Galadriel,
speaking for the ﬁrst time. Her voice was clear and musical, but
deeper than woman’s wont. ‘Gandalf the Grey set out with the Company, but he did not pass the borders of this land. Now tell us where
he is; for I much desired to speak with him again. But I cannot see
him from afar, unless he comes within the fences of Lothlórien: a
grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and of his mind are
hidden from me.’
‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. He
remained in Moria and did not escape.’
At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief and
amazement. ‘These are evil tidings,’ said Celeborn, ‘the most evil
that have been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.’ He
turned to Haldir. ‘Why has nothing of this been told to me before?’
he asked in the elven-tongue.
‘We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,’ said
Legolas. ‘At ﬁrst we were weary and danger was too close behind;
and afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked
in gladness on the fair paths of Lórien.’
‘Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,’ said Frodo.
‘Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our
escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.’

356

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Tell us now the full tale!’ said Celeborn.
Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the pass of
Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he spoke of Balin and
his book, and the ﬁght in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the ﬁre,
and the narrow bridge, and the coming of the Terror. ‘An evil of the
Ancient World it seemed, such as I have never seen before,’ said
Aragorn. ‘It was both a shadow and a ﬂame, strong and terrible.’
‘It was a Balrog of Morgoth,’ said Legolas; ‘of all elf-banes the
most deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.’
‘Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest
dreams, I saw Durin’s Bane,’ said Gimli in a low voice, and dread
was in his eyes.
‘Alas!’ said Celeborn. ‘We long have feared that under Caradhras
a terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this
evil in Moria again, I would have forbidden you to pass the northern
borders, you and all that went with you. And if it were possible, one
would say that at the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going
needlessly into the net of Moria.’
‘He would be rash indeed that said that thing,’ said Galadriel
gravely. ‘Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those
that followed him knew not his mind and cannot report his full
purpose. But however it may be with the guide, the followers are
blameless. Do not repent of your welcome to the Dwarf. If our folk
had been exiled long and far from Lothlórien, who of the Galadhrim,
even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not wish to look
upon their ancient home, though it had become an abode of dragons?
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram, and cold are the springs of
Kibil-nâla, and fair were the many-pillared halls of Khazad-dûm in
Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings beneath the stone.’ She
looked upon Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And
the Dwarf, hearing the names given in his own ancient tongue, looked
up and met her eyes; and it seemed to him that he looked suddenly
into the heart of an enemy and saw there love and understanding.
Wonder came into his face, and then he smiled in answer.
He rose clumsily and bowed in dwarf-fashion, saying: ‘Yet more
fair is the living land of Lórien, and the Lady Galadriel is above all
the jewels that lie beneath the earth!’
There was a silence. At length Celeborn spoke again. ‘I did not
know that your plight was so evil,’ he said. ‘Let Gimli forget my
harsh words: I spoke in the trouble of my heart. I will do what I can
to aid you, each according to his wish and need, but especially that
one of the little folk who bears the burden.’
‘Your quest is known to us,’ said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. ‘But

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

357

we will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove,
maybe, that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself
plainly purposed. For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the
wisest of the Elves of Middle-earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the
power of kings. He has dwelt in the West since the days of dawn,
and I have dwelt with him years uncounted; for ere the fall of
Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the mountains, and together
through ages of the world we have fought the long defeat.
‘I it was who ﬁrst summoned the White Council. And if my designs
had not gone amiss, it would have been governed by Gandalf the
Grey, and then mayhap things would have gone otherwise. But even
now there is hope left. I will not give you counsel, saying do this, or
do that. For not in doing or contriving, nor in choosing between this
course and another, can I avail; but only in knowing what was and is,
and in part also what shall be. But this I will say to you: your Quest
stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray but a little and it will fail, to the
ruin of all. Yet hope remains while all the Company is true.’
And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silence
looked searchingly at each of them in turn. None save Legolas and
Aragorn could long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and
hung his head.
At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes, and
she smiled. ‘Do not let your hearts be troubled,’ she said. ‘Tonight
you shall sleep in peace.’ Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary,
as those who have been questioned long and deeply, though no words
had been spoken openly.
‘Go now!’ said Celeborn. ‘You are worn with sorrow and much
toil. Even if your Quest did not concern us closely, you should have
refuge in this City, until you were healed and refreshed. Now you
shall rest, and we will not speak of your further road for a while.’
That night the Company slept upon the ground, much to the
satisfaction of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion
among the trees near the fountain, and in it they laid soft couches;
then speaking words of peace with fair Elvish voices they left them.
For a little while the travellers talked of their night before in the
tree-tops, and of their day’s journey, and of the Lord and Lady; for
they had not yet the heart to look further back.
‘What did you blush for, Sam?’ said Pippin. ‘You soon broke
down. Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I
hope it was nothing worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my
blankets.’
‘I never thought no such thing,’ answered Sam, in no mood for
jest. ‘If you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothing on, and I

358

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

didn’t like it. She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me
what I would do if she gave me the chance of ﬂying back home to
the Shire to a nice little hole with – with a bit of garden of my own.’
‘That’s funny,’ said Merry. ‘Almost exactly what I felt myself;
only, only well, I don’t think I’ll say any more,’ he ended lamely.
All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that he was
offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and
something that he greatly desired: clear before his mind it lay, and
to get it he had only to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest
and the war against Sauron to others.
‘And it seemed to me, too,’ said Gimli, ‘that my choice would
remain secret and known only to myself.’
‘To me it seemed exceedingly strange,’ said Boromir. ‘Maybe it
was only a test, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own
good purpose; but almost I should have said that she was tempting
us, and offering what she pretended to have the power to give. It
need not be said that I refused to listen. The Men of Minas Tirith
are true to their word.’ But what he thought that the Lady had offered
him Boromir did not tell.
And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir pressed him
with questions. ‘She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,’ he said.
‘Yes,’ said Frodo; ‘but whatever came into my mind then I will
keep there.’
‘Well, have a care!’ said Boromir. ‘I do not feel too sure of this
Elvish Lady and her purposes.’
‘Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel!’ said Aragorn sternly. ‘You
know not what you say. There is in her and in this land no evil,
unless a man bring it hither himself. Then let him beware! But tonight
I shall sleep without fear for the ﬁrst time since I left Rivendell. And
may I sleep deep, and forget for a while my grief ! I am weary in body
and in heart.’ He cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once
into a long sleep.
The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream disturbed
their slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day was
broad upon the lawn before the pavilion, and the fountain rose and
fell glittering in the sun.
They remained some days in Lothlórien, so far as they could tell
or remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun shone clear,
save for a gentle rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all
things fresh and clean. The air was cool and soft, as if it were early
spring, yet they felt about them the deep and thoughtful quiet of
winter. It seemed to them that they did little but eat and drink and
rest, and walk among the trees; and it was enough.

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

359

They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had little
speech with the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or would use the
Westron tongue. Haldir had bidden them farewell and gone back
again to the fences of the North, where great watch was now kept
since the tidings of Moria that the Company had brought. Legolas
was away much among the Galadhrim, and after the ﬁrst night he
did not sleep with the other companions, though he returned to eat
and talk with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he went
abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change.
Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of
Gandalf, and all that each had known and seen of him came clear
before their minds. As they were healed of hurt and weariness of
body the grief of their loss grew more keen. Often they heard nearby
Elvish voices singing, and knew that they were making songs of lamentation for his fall, for they caught his name among the sweet sad
words that they could not understand.
Mithrandir, Mithrandir sang the Elves, O Pilgrim Grey! For so they
loved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Company, he would not
interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that
for him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for
song.
It was Frodo who ﬁrst put something of his sorrow into halting
words. He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Rivendell he had listened and had not sung himself, though his memory
was stored with many things that others had made before him. But
now as he sat beside the fountain in Lórien and heard about him the
voices of the Elves, his thought took shape in a song that seemed fair
to him; yet when he tried to repeat it to Sam only snatches remained,
faded as a handful of withered leaves.
When evening in the Shire was grey
his footsteps on the Hill were heard;
before the dawn he went away
on journey long without a word.
From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden door
and darkling woods he walked at will.
With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men,
with mortal and immortal folk,
with bird on bough and beast in den,
in their own secret tongues he spoke.

360

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

A deadly sword, a healing hand,
a back that bent beneath its load;
a trumpet-voice, a burning brand,
a weary pilgrim on the road.
A lord of wisdom throned he sat,
swift in anger, quick to laugh;
an old man in a battered hat
who leaned upon a thorny staff.
He stood upon the bridge alone
and Fire and Shadow both deﬁed;
his staff was broken on the stone,
in Khazad-dûm his wisdom died.
‘Why, you’ll be beating Mr. Bilbo next!’ said Sam.
‘No, I am afraid not,’ said Frodo. ‘But that is the best I can do
yet.’
‘Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you’ll say a
word about his ﬁreworks,’ said Sam. ‘Something like this:
The ﬁnest rockets ever seen:
they burst in stars of blue and green,
or after thunder golden showers
came falling like a rain of ﬂowers.
Though that doesn’t do them justice by a long road.’
‘No, I’ll leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But – well,
I can’t talk of it any more. I can’t bear to think of bringing the news
to him.’
One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool
twilight. Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenly the
shadow of parting had fallen: he knew somehow that the time was
very near when he must leave Lothlórien.
‘What do you think of Elves now, Sam?’ he said. ‘I asked you the
same question once before – it seems a very long while ago; but you
have seen more of them since then.’
‘I have indeed!’ said Sam. ‘And I reckon there’s Elves and Elves.
They’re all Elvish enough, but they’re not all the same. Now these
folk aren’t wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes
of us: they seem to belong here, more even than Hobbits do in the
Shire. Whether they’ve made the land, or the land’s made them, it’s
hard to say, if you take my meaning. It’s wonderfully quiet here.

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

361

Nothing seems to be going on, and nobody seems to want it to. If
there’s any magic about, it’s right down deep, where I can’t lay my
hands on it, in a manner of speaking.’
‘You can see and feel it everywhere,’ said Frodo.
‘Well,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t see nobody working it. No ﬁreworks
like poor old Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don’t see nothing
of the Lord and Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could
do some wonderful things, if she had a mind. I’d dearly love to see
some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo!’
‘I wouldn’t,’ said Frodo. ‘I am content. And I don’t miss Gandalf ’s
ﬁreworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his
voice.’
‘You’re right,’ said Sam. ‘And don’t think I’m ﬁnding fault. I’ve
often wanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales,
but I’ve never heard of a better land than this. It’s like being at home
and on a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don’t
want to leave. All the same, I’m beginning to feel that if we’ve got
to go on, then we’d best get it over.
‘It’s the job that’s never started as takes longest to ﬁnish, as my old
gaffer used to say. And I don’t reckon that these folk can do much
more to help us, magic or no. It’s when we leave this land that we
shall miss Gandalf worse, I’m thinking.’
‘I am afraid that’s only too true, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘Yet I hope
very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves
again.’
Even as he spoke, they saw, as if she came in answer to their
words, the Lady Galadriel approaching. Tall and white and fair she
walked beneath the trees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them.
Turning aside, she led them towards the southern slopes of the
hill of Caras Galadhon, and passing through a high green hedge they
came into an enclosed garden. No trees grew there, and it lay open
to the sky. The evening star had risen and was shining with white
ﬁre above the western woods. Down a long ﬂight of steps the Lady
went into the deep green hollow, through which ran murmuring the
silver stream that issued from the fountain on the hill. At the bottom,
upon a low pedestal carved like a branching tree, stood a basin of
silver, wide and shallow, and beside it stood a silver ewer.
With water from the stream Galadriel ﬁlled the basin to the brim,
and breathed on it, and when the water was still again she spoke.
‘Here is the Mirror of Galadriel,’ she said. ‘I have brought you here
so that you may look in it, if you will.’
The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the Elf-lady
beside him was tall and pale. ‘What shall we look for, and what shall
we see?’ asked Frodo, ﬁlled with awe.

362

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,’ she answered,
‘and to some I can show what they desire to see. But the Mirror will
also show things unbidden, and those are often stranger and more
proﬁtable than things which we wish to behold. What you will see,
if you leave the Mirror free to work, I cannot tell. For it shows things
that were, and things that are, and things that yet may be. But which
it is that he sees, even the wisest cannot always tell. Do you wish to
look?’
Frodo did not answer.
‘And you?’ she said, turning to Sam. ‘For this is what your folk
would call magic, I believe; though I do not understand clearly what
they mean; and they seem to use the same word of the deceits of the
Enemy. But this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not
say that you wished to see Elf-magic?’
‘I did,’ said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. ‘I’ll
have a peep, Lady, if you’re willing.
‘And I’d not mind a glimpse of what’s going on at home,’ he said
in an aside to Frodo. ‘It seems a terrible long time that I’ve been
away. But there, like as not I’ll only see the stars, or something that
I won’t understand.’
‘Like as not,’ said the Lady with a gentle laugh. ‘But come, you
shall look and see what you may. Do not touch the water!’
Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned over
the basin. The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reﬂected
in it.
‘There’s only stars, as I thought,’ he said. Then he gave a low
gasp, for the stars went out. As if a dark veil had been withdrawn,
the Mirror grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and
the branches of trees were waving and tossing in the wind. But before
Sam could make up his mind what it was that he saw, the light faded;
and now he thought he saw Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep
under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed to see himself going along
a dim passage, and climbing an endless winding stair. It came to him
suddenly that he was looking urgently for something, but what it was
he did not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went back, and
he saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and he
could see what was going on: they were not waving in the wind, they
were falling, crashing to the ground.
‘Hi!’ cried Sam in an outraged voice. ‘There’s that Ted Sandyman
a-cutting down trees as he shouldn’t. They didn’t ought to be felled:
it’s that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater.
I wish I could get at Ted, and I’d fell him!’
But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and a large
red-brick building was being put up where it had stood. Lots of folk

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

363

were busily at work. There was a tall red chimney nearby. Black
smoke seemed to cloud the surface of the Mirror.
‘There’s some devilry at work in the Shire,’ he said. ‘Elrond knew
what he was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.’ Then
suddenly Sam gave a cry and sprang away. ‘I can’t stay here,’ he said
wildly. ‘I must go home. They’ve dug up Bagshot Row, and there’s
the poor old Gaffer going down the Hill with his bits of things on a
barrow. I must go home!’
‘You cannot go home alone,’ said the Lady. ‘You did not wish to
go home without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and
yet you knew that evil things might well be happening in the Shire.
Remember that the Mirror shows many things, and not all have yet
come to pass. Some never come to be, unless those that behold the
visions turn aside from their path to prevent them. The Mirror is
dangerous as a guide of deeds.’
Sam sat on the ground and put his head in his hands. ‘I wish I
had never come here, and I don’t want to see no more magic,’
he said and fell silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly,
as if struggling with tears. ‘No, I’ll go home by the long road with
Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said. ‘But I hope I do get back some
day. If what I’ve seen turns out true, somebody’s going to catch it
hot!’
‘Do you now wish to look, Frodo?’ said the Lady Galadriel. ‘You
did not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.’
‘Do you advise me to look?’ asked Frodo.
‘No,’ she said. ‘I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am
not a counsellor. You may learn something, and whether what you
see be fair or evil, that may be proﬁtable, and yet it may not. Seeing
is both good and perilous. Yet I think, Frodo, that you have courage
and wisdom enough for the venture, or I would not have brought
you here. Do as you will!’
‘I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent
over the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and he saw a twilit
land. Mountains loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A
long grey road wound back out of sight. Far away a ﬁgure came
slowly down the road, faint and small at ﬁrst, but growing larger and
clearer as it approached. Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded
him of Gandalf. He almost called aloud the wizard’s name, and then
he saw that the ﬁgure was clothed not in grey but in white, in a white
that shone faintly in the dusk; and in its hand there was a white staff.
The head was so bowed that he could see no face, and presently the
ﬁgure turned aside round a bend in the road and went out of the
Mirror’s view. Doubt came into Frodo’s mind: was this a vision of

364

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gandalf on one of his many lonely journeys long ago, or was it
Saruman?
The vision now changed. Brief and small but very vivid he caught
a glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room. The table was
littered with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows.
Then there was a pause, and after it many swift scenes followed
that Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which
he had become involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which
he had never seen before but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell.
The sea rose and raged in a great storm. Then he saw against the
Sun, sinking blood-red into a wrack of clouds, the black outline of
a tall ship with torn sails riding up out of the West. Then a wide
river ﬂowing through a populous city. Then a white fortress with
seven towers. And then again a ship with black sails, but now it was
morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing
the emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke as of ﬁre and
battle arose, and again the sun went down in a burning red that faded
into a grey mist; and into the mist a small ship passed away, twinkling
with lights. It vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away.
But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as if a hole
had opened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness.
In the black abyss there appeared a single Eye that slowly grew, until
it ﬁlled nearly all the Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood
rooted, unable to cry out or to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was
rimmed with ﬁre, but was itself glazed, yellow as a cat’s, watchful
and intent, and the black slit of its pupil opened on a pit, a window
into nothing.
Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and
Frodo knew with certainty and horror that among the many things
that it sought he himself was one. But he also knew that it could not
see him – not yet, not unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon
its chain about his neck grew heavy, heavier than a great stone, and
his head was dragged downwards. The Mirror seemed to be growing
hot and curls of steam were rising from the water. He was slipping
forward.
‘Do not touch the water!’ said the Lady Galadriel softly. The vision
faded, and Frodo found that he was looking at the cool stars twinkling
in the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at
the Lady.
‘I know what it was that you last saw,’ she said; ‘for that is also
in my mind. Do not be afraid! But do not think that only by singing
amid the trees, nor even by the slender arrows of elven-bows, is this
land of Lothlórien maintained and defended against its Enemy. I say
to you, Frodo, that even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

365

and know his mind, or all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And
he gropes ever to see me and my thought. But still the door is closed!’
She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards
the East in a gesture of rejection and denial. Eärendil, the Evening
Star, most beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it
that the ﬁgure of the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground.
Its rays glanced upon a ring about her ﬁnger; it glittered like polished
gold overlaid with silver light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if
the Even-star had come down to rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at
the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed to him that he understood.
‘Yes,’ she said, divining his thought, ‘it is not permitted to speak
of it, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be hidden from the
Ring-bearer, and one who has seen the Eye. Verily it is in the land
of Lórien upon the ﬁnger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains.
This is Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeper.
‘He suspects, but he does not know – not yet. Do you not see
now wherefore your coming is to us as the footstep of Doom? For if
you fail, then we are laid bare to the Enemy. Yet if you succeed, then
our power is diminished, and Lothlórien will fade, and the tides of
Time will sweep it away. We must depart into the West, or dwindle
to a rustic folk of dell and cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.’
Frodo bent his head. ‘And what do you wish?’ he said at last.
‘That what should be shall be,’ she answered. ‘The love of the
Elves for their land and their works is deeper than the deeps of the
Sea, and their regret is undying and cannot ever wholly be assuaged.
Yet they will cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they
know him now. For the fate of Lothlórien you are not answerable,
but only for the doing of your own task. Yet I could wish, were it of
any avail, that the One Ring had never been wrought, or had remained
for ever lost.’
‘You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,’ said Frodo.
‘I will give you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter
for me.’
Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh. ‘Wise the Lady
Galadriel may be,’ she said, ‘yet here she has met her match in courtesy.
Gently are you revenged for my testing of your heart at our ﬁrst
meeting. You begin to see with a keen eye. I do not deny that my
heart has greatly desired to ask what you offer. For many long years
I had pondered what I might do, should the Great Ring come into
my hands, and behold! it was brought within my grasp. The evil that
was devised long ago works on in many ways, whether Sauron himself
stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set to the
credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?
‘And now at last it comes. You will give me the Ring freely! In

366

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

place of the Dark Lord you will set up a Queen. And I shall not be
dark, but beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair
as the Sea and the Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Dreadful
as the Storm and the Lightning! Stronger than the foundations of
the earth. All shall love me and despair!’
She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore there issued
a great light that illumined her alone and left all else dark. She stood
before Frodo seeming now tall beyond measurement, and beautiful
beyond enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall,
and the light faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and lo! she was
shrunken: a slender elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle
voice was soft and sad.
‘I pass the test,’ she said. ‘I will diminish, and go into the West,
and remain Galadriel.’
They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke
again. ‘Let us return!’ she said. ‘In the morning you must depart, for
now we have chosen, and the tides of fate are ﬂowing.’
‘I would ask one thing before we go,’ said Frodo, ‘a thing which
I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear
the One Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts
of those that wear them?’
‘You have not tried,’ she said. ‘Only thrice have you set the Ring
upon your ﬁnger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try! It
would destroy you. Did not Gandalf tell you that the rings give power
according to the measure of each possessor? Before you could use
that power you would need to become far stronger, and to train your
will to the domination of others. Yet even so, as Ring-bearer and as
one that has borne it on ﬁnger and seen that which is hidden, your
sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thought more clearly
than many that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that
holds the Seven and the Nine. And did you not see and recognize
the ring upon my ﬁnger? Did you see my ring?’ she asked turning
again to Sam.
‘No, Lady,’ he answered. ‘To tell you the truth, I wondered what
you were talking about. I saw a star through your ﬁngers. But if you’ll
pardon my speaking out, I think my master was right. I wish you’d
take his Ring. You’d put things to rights. You’d stop them digging
up the Gaffer and turning him adrift. You’d make some folk pay for
their dirty work.’
‘I would,’ she said. ‘That is how it would begin. But it would not
stop with that, alas! We will not speak more of it. Let us go!’

Chapter 8
´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO
That night the Company was again summoned to the chamber of
Celeborn, and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words.
At length Celeborn spoke of their departure.
‘Now is the time,’ he said, ‘when those who wish to continue the
Quest must harden their hearts to leave this land. Those who no
longer wish to go forward may remain here, for a while. But whether
they stay or go, none can be sure of peace. For we are come now
to the edge of doom. Here those who wish may await the oncoming
of the hour till either the ways of the world lie open again, or we
summon them to the last need of Lórien. Then they may return to
their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in
battle.’
There was a silence. ‘They all resolved to go forward,’ said Galadriel
looking in their eyes.
‘As for me,’ said Boromir, ‘my way home lies onward and not
back.’
‘That is true,’ said Celeborn, ‘but is all this Company going with
you to Minas Tirith?’
‘We have not decided our course,’ said Aragorn. ‘Beyond Lothlórien I do not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not
think that even he had any clear purpose.’
‘Maybe not,’ said Celeborn, ‘yet when you leave this land, you
can no longer forget the Great River. As some of you know well, it
cannot be crossed by travellers with baggage between Lórien and
Gondor, save by boat. And are not the bridges of Osgiliath broken
down and all the landings held now by the Enemy?
‘On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon
this side, upon the west; but the straight road of the Quest lies east of
the River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take?’
‘If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way
to Minas Tirith,’ answered Boromir. ‘But I am not the leader of the
Company.’ The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful
and troubled.
‘I see that you do not yet know what to do,’ said Celeborn. ‘It is
not my part to choose for you; but I will help you as I may. There
are some among you who can handle boats: Legolas, whose folk know
the swift Forest River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the
traveller.’

368

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘And one Hobbit!’ cried Merry. ‘Not all of us look on boats as
wild horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.’
‘That is well,’ said Celeborn. ‘Then I will furnish your Company
with boats. They must be small and light, for if you go far by water,
there are places where you will be forced to carry them. You will
come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir, and maybe at last to the great falls
of Rauros where the River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and
there are other perils. Boats may make your journey less toilsome for
a while. Yet they will not give you counsel: in the end you must leave
them and the River, and turn west – or east.’
Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats comforted him much, not least because there would now be no need to
decide his course for some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils lay ahead, it seemed better to ﬂoat down the
broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to plod forward with bent
backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still thought boats as
bad as wild horses, or worse, and not all the dangers that he had
survived made him think better of them.
‘All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven before
noon tomorrow,’ said Celeborn. ‘I will send my people to you in the
morning to help you make ready for the journey. Now we will wish
you all a fair night and untroubled sleep.’
‘Good night, my friends!’ said Galadriel. ‘Sleep in peace! Do not
trouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the road tonight.
Maybe the paths that you each shall tread are already laid before
your feet, though you do not see them. Good night!’
The Company now took their leave and returned to their pavilion.
Legolas went with them, for this was to be their last night in Lothlórien, and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take
counsel together.
For a long time they debated what they should do, and how it
would be best to attempt the fulﬁlling of their purpose with the Ring;
but they came to no decision. It was plain that most of them desired
to go ﬁrst to Minas Tirith, and to escape at least for a while from
the terror of the Enemy. They would have been willing to follow a
leader over the River and into the shadow of Mordor; but Frodo
spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in his mind.
His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had been to go
with Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he
believed that the message of the dreams was a summons, and that
the hour had come at last when the heir of Elendil should come forth
and strive with Sauron for the mastery. But in Moria the burden of
Gandalf had been laid on him; and he knew that he could not now

THE GREAT RIVER

393

Frodo, and he cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to
look up as the boat drew near. Even Boromir bowed his head as the
boats whirled by, frail and ﬂeeting as little leaves, under the enduring
shadow of the sentinels of Númenor. So they passed into the dark
chasm of the Gates.
Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side.
Far off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and
a wind screamed over them. Frodo crouching over his knees heard
Sam in front muttering and groaning: ‘What a place! What a horrible
place! Just let me get out of this boat, and I’ll never wet my toes in
a puddle again, let alone a river!’
‘Fear not!’ said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned and saw
Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no
longer there. In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and
erect, guiding the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back,
and his dark hair was blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a
king returning from exile to his own land.
‘Fear not!’ he said. ‘Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses
of Isildur and Anárion, my sires of old. Under their shadow Elessar,
the Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House of Valandil Isildur’s son,
heir of Elendil, has naught to dread!’
Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: ‘Would
that Gandalf were here! How my heart yearns for Minas Anor and
the walls of my own city! But whither now shall I go?’
The chasm was long and dark, and ﬁlled with the noise of wind
and rushing water and echoing stone. It bent somewhat towards the
west so that at ﬁrst all was dark ahead; but soon Frodo saw a tall
gap of light before him, ever growing. Swiftly it drew near, and suddenly the boats shot through, out into a wide clear light.
The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy
sky. The pent waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale Nen
Hithoel, fenced by steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees,
but their heads were bare, cold-gleaming in the sunlight. At the far
southern end rose three peaks. The midmost stood somewhat forward
from the others and sundered from them, an island in the waters,
about which the ﬂowing River ﬂung pale shimmering arms. Distant
but deep there came up on the wind a roaring sound like the roll of
thunder heard far away.
‘Behold Tol Brandir!’ said Aragorn, pointing south to the tall peak.
‘Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen,
the Hills of Hearing and of Sight. In the days of the great kings there
were high seats upon them, and watch was kept there. But it is said
that no foot of man or beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir.

396

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

tall cliffs were steep slopes upon which trees climbed, mounting one
head above another; and above them again were grey faces of
inaccessible rock, crowned by a great spire of stone. Many birds were
circling about it, but no sign of other living things could be seen.
When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. ‘The
day has come at last,’ he said: ‘the day of choice which we have long
delayed. What shall now become of our Company that has travelled
so far in fellowship? Shall we turn west with Boromir and go to the
wars of Gondor; or turn east to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we
break our fellowship and go this way and that as each may choose?
Whatever we do must be done soon. We cannot long halt here. The
enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I fear that the Orcs may
already be on this side of the water.’
There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved.
‘Well, Frodo,’ said Aragorn at last. ‘I fear that the burden is laid
upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own
way you alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am
not Gandalf, and though I have tried to bear his part, I do not know
what design or hope he had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most
likely it seems that if he were here now the choice would still wait
on you. Such is your fate.’
Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. ‘I know that
haste is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me
an hour longer, and I will speak. Let me be alone!’
Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity. ‘Very well, Frodo son of
Drogo,’ he said. ‘You shall have an hour, and you shall be alone. We
will stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.’
Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had been
watching his master with great concern, shook his head and muttered:
‘Plain as a pikestaff it is, but it’s no good Sam Gamgee putting in
his spoke just now.’
Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while
the others restrained themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes
of Boromir followed Frodo intently, until he passed out of sight in
the trees at the foot of Amon Hen.
Wandering aimlessly at ﬁrst in the wood, Frodo found that his
feet were leading him up towards the slopes of the hill. He came to
a path, the dwindling ruins of a road of long ago. In steep places
stairs of stone had been hewn, but now they were cracked and worn,
and split by the roots of trees. For some while he climbed, not caring
which way he went, until he came to a grassy place. Rowan-trees
grew about it, and in the midst was a wide ﬂat stone. The little upland
lawn was open upon the East and was ﬁlled now with the early

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

397

sunlight. Frodo halted and looked out over the River, far below him,
to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air between
him and the untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros was a mighty roaring
mingled with a deep throbbing boom.
He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his hands,
staring eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened
since Bilbo left the Shire was passing through his mind, and he recalled and pondered everything that he could remember of Gandalf ’s
words. Time went on, and still he was no nearer to a choice.
Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to
him that something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon
him. He sprang up and turned; but all that he saw to his surprise
was Boromir, and his face was smiling and kind.
‘I was afraid for you, Frodo,’ he said, coming forward. ‘If Aragorn
is right and Orcs are near, then none of us should wander alone, and
you least of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too is heavy.
May I stay now and talk for a while, since I have found you? It would
comfort me. Where there are so many, all speech becomes a debate
without end. But two together may perhaps ﬁnd wisdom.’
‘You are kind,’ answered Frodo. ‘But I do not think that any
speech will help me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid
of doing it, Boromir: afraid.’
Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.
Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. ‘Are you sure that
you do not suffer needlessly?’ he said. ‘I wish to help you. You need
counsel in your hard choice. Will you not take mine?’
‘I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir,’
said Frodo. ‘And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of
my heart.’
‘Warning? Warning against what?’ said Boromir sharply.
‘Against delay. Against the way that seems easier. Against refusal
of the burden that is laid on me. Against – well, if it must be said,
against trust in the strength and truth of Men.’
‘Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your little
country, though you knew it not.’
‘I do not doubt the valour of your people. But the world is changing. The walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not strong
enough. If they fail, what then?’
‘We shall fall in battle valiantly. Yet there is still hope that they
will not fail.’
‘No hope while the Ring lasts,’ said Frodo.
‘Ah! The Ring!’ said Boromir, his eyes lighting. ‘The Ring! Is it
not a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for

402

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Boromir had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he
could hear cries and calls from the woods near the shore below.
‘They’ll be hunting for me,’ he said. ‘I wonder how long I have
been away. Hours, I should think.’ He hesitated. ‘What can I do?’
he muttered. ‘I must go now or I shall never go. I shan’t get a chance
again. I hate leaving them, and like this without any explanation. But
surely they will understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?’
Slowly he drew out the Ring and put it on once more. He vanished
and passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind.
The others remained long by the river-side. For some time they
had been silent, moving restlessly about; but now they were sitting
in a circle, and they were talking. Every now and again they made
efforts to speak of other things, of their long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn concerning the realm of Gondor and
its ancient history, and the remnants of its great works that could
still be seen in this strange border-land of the Emyn Muil: the stone
kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great Stair beside the
falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words strayed back to
Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to do? Why was he
hesitating?
‘He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,’ said
Aragorn. ‘And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for
the Company to go east, since we have been tracked by Gollum, and
must fear that the secret of our journey is already betrayed. But Minas
Tirith is no nearer to the Fire and the destruction of the Burden.
‘We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but
the Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even
Elrond said was beyond his power: either to keep the Burden secret,
or to hold off the full might of the Enemy when he comes to take it.
Which way would any of us choose in Frodo’s place? I do not know.
Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.’
‘Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. ‘Yet we must needs make up
our minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo?
Let us call him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.’
‘And so should I,’ said Gimli. ‘We, of course, were only sent to
help the Bearer along the road, to go no further than we wished; and
none of us is under any oath or command to seek Mount Doom.
Hard was my parting from Lothlórien. Yet I have come so far, and
I say this: now we have reached the last choice, it is clear to me that
I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose Minas Tirith, but if he does
not, then I follow him.’
‘And I too will go with him,’ said Legolas. ‘It would be faithless
now to say farewell.’

414

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

broken near the hilt; his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many
Orcs lay slain, piled all about him and at his feet.
Aragorn knelt beside him. Boromir opened his eyes and strove to
speak. At last slow words came. ‘I tried to take the Ring from Frodo,’ he
said. ‘I am sorry. I have paid.’ His glance strayed to his fallen enemies;
twenty at least lay there. ‘They have gone: the Halﬂings: the Orcs have
taken them. I think they are not dead. Orcs bound them.’ He paused
and his eyes closed wearily. After a moment he spoke again.
‘Farewell, Aragorn! Go to Minas Tirith and save my people! I
have failed.’
‘No!’ said Aragorn, taking his hand and kissing his brow. ‘You
have conquered. Few have gained such a victory. Be at peace! Minas
Tirith shall not fall!’
Boromir smiled.
‘Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?’ said Aragorn.
But Boromir did not speak again.
‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Thus passes the heir of Denethor, Lord of
the Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all
in ruin. It is I that have failed. Vain was Gandalf ’s trust in me. What
shall I do now? Boromir has laid it on me to go to Minas Tirith, and
my heart desires it; but where are the Ring and the Bearer? How
shall I ﬁnd them and save the Quest from disaster?’
He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir’s
hand. So it was that Legolas and Gimli found him. They came from
the western slopes of the hill, silently, creeping through the trees as
if they were hunting. Gimli had his axe in hand, and Legolas his long
knife: all his arrows were spent. When they came into the glade they
halted in amazement; and then they stood a moment with heads
bowed in grief, for it seemed to them plain what had happened.
‘Alas!’ said Legolas, coming to Aragorn’s side. ‘We have hunted
and slain many Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more
use here. We came when we heard the horn – but too late, it seems.
I fear you have taken deadly hurt.’
‘Boromir is dead,’ said Aragorn. ‘I am unscathed, for I was not
here with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon
the hill.’
‘The hobbits!’ cried Gimli. ‘Where are they then? Where is Frodo?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn wearily. ‘Before he died
Boromir told me that the Orcs had bound them; he did not think
that they were dead. I sent him to follow Merry and Pippin; but I did
not ask him if Frodo or Sam were with him: not until it was too late.
All that I have done today has gone amiss. What is to be done now?’
‘First we must tend the fallen,’ said Legolas. ‘We cannot leave
him lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.’

416

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I have not seen these tokens before,’ said Aragorn. ‘What do they
mean?’
‘S is for Sauron,’ said Gimli. ‘That is easy to read.’
‘Nay!’ said Legolas. ‘Sauron does not use the elf-runes.’
‘Neither does he use his right name, nor permit it to be spelt or
spoken,’ said Aragorn. ‘And he does not use white. The Orcs in the
service of Barad-dûr use the sign of the Red Eye.’ He stood for a
moment in thought. ‘S is for Saruman, I guess,’ he said at length.
‘There is evil afoot in Isengard, and the West is no longer safe. It is
as Gandalf feared: by some means the traitor Saruman has had news
of our journey. It is likely too that he knows of Gandalf ’s fall. Pursuers
from Moria may have escaped the vigilance of Lórien, or they may
have avoided that land and come to Isengard by other paths. Orcs
travel fast. But Saruman has many ways of learning news. Do you
remember the birds?’
‘Well, we have no time to ponder riddles,’ said Gimli. ‘Let us bear
Boromir away!’
‘But after that we must guess the riddles, if we are to choose our
course rightly,’ answered Aragorn.
‘Maybe there is no right choice,’ said Gimli.
Taking his axe the Dwarf now cut several branches. These they
lashed together with bowstrings, and spread their cloaks upon the
frame. Upon this rough bier they carried the body of their companion
to the shore, together with such trophies of his last battle as they
chose to send forth with him. It was only a short way, yet they found
it no easy task, for Boromir was a man both tall and strong.
At the water-side Aragorn remained, watching the bier, while
Legolas and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth Galen. It was a
mile or more, and it was some time before they came back, paddling
two boats swiftly along the shore.
‘There is a strange tale to tell!’ said Legolas. ‘There are only two
boats upon the bank. We could ﬁnd no trace of the other.’
‘Have Orcs been there?’ asked Aragorn.
‘We saw no signs of them,’ answered Gimli. ‘And Orcs would
have taken or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.’
‘I will look at the ground when we come there,’ said Aragorn.
Now they laid Boromir in the middle of the boat that was to bear
him away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed
beneath his head. They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it
upon his shoulders. The golden belt of Lórien gleamed about his
waist. His helm they set beside him, and across his lap they laid the
cloven horn and the hilt and shards of his sword; beneath his feet

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

435

hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Or
let us bind them and take them to the king.’
´
´
‘Peace, Eothain!’
said Eomer
in his own tongue. ‘Leave me a while.
Tell the éored to assemble on the path, and make ready to ride to the
Entwade.’
´
Muttering Eothain
retired, and spoke to the others. Soon they
´
drew off and left Eomer
alone with the three companions.
‘All that you say is strange, Aragorn,’ he said. ‘Yet you speak the
truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefore
they are not easily deceived. But you have not told all. Will you not
now speak more fully of your errand, so that I may judge what to
do?’
‘I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks
ago,’ answered Aragorn. ‘With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith.
My errand was to go to that city with the son of Denethor, to aid
his folk in their war against Sauron. But the Company that I journeyed
with had other business. Of that I cannot speak now. Gandalf the
Grey was our leader.’
´
‘Gandalf !’ Eomer
exclaimed. ‘Gandalf Greyhame is known in the
Mark; but his name, I warn you, is no longer a password to the king’s
favour. He has been a guest in the land many times in the memory
of men, coming as he will, after a season, or after many years. He is
ever the herald of strange events: a bringer of evil, some now say.
‘Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone
amiss. At that time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we
counted Saruman our friend, but Gandalf came then and warned us
that sudden war was preparing in Isengard. He said that he himself
had been a prisoner in Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and he
begged for help. But Théoden would not listen to him, and he went
away. Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in Théoden’s ears! He
is wroth. For Gandalf took the horse that is called Shadowfax, the
most precious of all the king’s steeds, chief of the Mearas, which only
the Lord of the Mark may ride. For the sire of their race was the
great horse of Eorl that knew the speech of Men. Seven nights ago
Shadowfax returned; but the king’s anger is not less, for now the
horse is wild and will let no man handle him.’
‘Then Shadowfax has found his way alone from the far North,’
said Aragorn; ‘for it was there that he and Gandalf parted. But alas!
Gandalf will ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines of
Moria and comes not again.’
´
‘That is heavy tidings,’ said Eomer.
‘At least to me, and to many;
though not to all, as you may ﬁnd, if you come to the king.’
‘It is tidings more grievous than any in this land can understand,

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

437

many months. He has taken Orcs into his service, and Wolf-riders,
and evil Men, and he has closed the Gap against us, so that we are
likely to be beset both east and west.
‘It is ill dealing with such a foe: he is a wizard both cunning and
dwimmer-crafty, having many guises. He walks here and there, they
say, as an old man hooded and cloaked, very like to Gandalf, as many
now recall. His spies slip through every net, and his birds of ill omen
are abroad in the sky. I do not know how it will all end, and my
heart misgives me; for it seems to me that his friends do not all dwell
in Isengard. But if you come to the king’s house, you shall see for
yourself. Will you not come? Do I hope in vain that you have been
sent to me for a help in doubt and need?’
‘I will come when I may,’ said Aragorn.
´
‘Come now!’ said Eomer.
‘The Heir of Elendil would be a strength
indeed to the Sons of Eorl in this evil tide. There is battle even now
upon the Westemnet, and I fear that it may go ill for us.
‘Indeed in this riding north I went without the king’s leave, for in
my absence his house is left with little guard. But scouts warned me
of the orc-host coming down out of the East Wall four nights ago,
and among them they reported that some bore the white badges of
Saruman. So suspecting what I most fear, a league between Orthanc
and the Dark Tower, I led forth my éored, men of my own household;
and we overtook the Orcs at nightfall two days ago, near to the
borders of the Entwood. There we surrounded them, and gave battle
yesterday at dawn. Fifteen of my men I lost, and twelve horses alas!
For the Orcs were greater in number than we counted on. Others
joined them, coming out of the East across the Great River: their
trail is plain to see a little north of this spot. And others, too, came
out of the forest. Great Orcs, who also bore the White Hand of
Isengard: that kind is stronger and more fell than all others.
‘Nonetheless we put an end to them. But we have been too long
away. We are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are
spare horses as you see. There is work for the Sword to do. Yes, and
we could ﬁnd a use for Gimli’s axe and the bow of Legolas, if they
will pardon my rash words concerning the Lady of the Wood. I spoke
only as do all men in my land, and I would gladly learn better.’
‘I thank you for your fair words,’ said Aragorn, ‘and my heart
desires to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope
remains.’
´
‘Hope does not remain,’ said Eomer.
‘You will not ﬁnd your
friends on the North-borders.’
‘Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far
from the East Wall that one at least of them was still alive there. But
between the wall and the downs we have found no other trace of

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

441

hear it; and hard too for the old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond
was against their coming.’
‘But Gandalf was not,’ said Legolas.
‘But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the ﬁrst to be
lost,’ answered Gimli. ‘His foresight failed him.’
‘The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of
safety, for himself or for others,’ said Aragorn. ‘There are some things
that it is better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be
dark. But I shall not depart from this place yet. In any case we must
here await the morning-light.’
A little way beyond the battle-ﬁeld they made their camp under
a spreading tree: it looked like a chestnut, and yet it still bore many
broad brown leaves of a former year, like dry hands with long splayed
ﬁngers; they rattled mournfully in the night-breeze.
Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. ‘Let
us light a ﬁre,’ he said. ‘I care no longer for the danger. Let the Orcs
come as thick as summer-moths round a candle!’
‘If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it might draw
them hither,’ said Legolas.
‘And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,’ said
Aragorn. ‘We are near to the mountain-marches of the traitor
Saruman. Also we are on the very edge of Fangorn, and it is perilous
to touch the trees of that wood, it is said.’
‘But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday,’ said
Gimli, ‘and they felled trees for the ﬁre, as can be seen. Yet they
passed the night after safely here, when their labour was ended.’
‘They were many,’ said Aragorn, ‘and they do not heed the wrath
of Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under
the trees. But our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself.
So have a care! Cut no living wood!’
‘There is no need,’ said Gimli. ‘The Riders have left chip and
bough enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.’ He went off
to gather fuel, and busied himself with building and kindling a ﬁre;
but Aragorn sat silent with his back to the great tree, deep in thought;
and Legolas stood alone in the open, looking towards the profound
shadow of the wood, leaning forward, as one who listens to voices
calling from a distance.
When the Dwarf had a small bright blaze going, the three companions drew close to it and sat together, shrouding the light with
their hooded forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree
reaching out above them.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘The tree is glad of the ﬁre!’
It may have been that the dancing shadows tricked their eyes, but

Chapter 3
THE URUK-HAI
Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream: it seemed that he could
hear his own small voice echoing in black tunnels, calling Frodo,
Frodo! But instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous orc-faces grinned
at him out of the shadows, hundreds of hideous arms grasped at him
from every side. Where was Merry?
He woke. Cold air blew on his face. He was lying on his back.
Evening was coming and the sky above was growing dim. He turned
and found that the dream was little worse than the waking. His
wrists, legs, and ankles were tied with cords. Beside him Merry lay,
white-faced, with a dirty rag bound across his brows. All about them
sat or stood a great company of Orcs.
Slowly in Pippin’s aching head memory pieced itself together and
became separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and Merry
had run off into the woods. What had come over them? Why had
they dashed off like that, taking no notice of old Strider? They had
run a long way shouting – he could not remember how far or how
long; and then suddenly they had crashed right into a group of Orcs:
they were standing listening, and they did not appear to see Merry
and Pippin until they were almost in their arms. Then they yelled
and dozens of other goblins had sprung out of the trees. Merry and
he had drawn their swords, but the Orcs did not wish to ﬁght, and
had tried only to lay hold of them, even when Merry had cut off
several of their arms and hands. Good old Merry!
Then Boromir had come leaping through the trees. He had made
them ﬁght. He slew many of them and the rest ﬂed. But they had
not gone far on the way back when they were attacked again, by a
hundred Orcs at least, some of them very large, and they shot a rain
of arrows: always at Boromir. Boromir had blown his great horn till
the woods rang, and at ﬁrst the Orcs had been dismayed and had
drawn back; but when no answer but the echoes came, they had
attacked more ﬁercely than ever. Pippin did not remember much
more. His last memory was of Boromir leaning against a tree, plucking
out an arrow; then darkness fell suddenly.
‘I suppose I was knocked on the head,’ he said to himself. ‘I
wonder if poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to Boromir?
Why didn’t the Orcs kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?’
He could not answer the questions. He felt cold and sick. ‘I wish
Gandalf had never persuaded Elrond to let us come,’ he thought.

THE URUK-HAI

453

heads and also began to put on speed. The forest was dark and close.
Already they had passed a few outlying trees. The land was beginning
to slope upwards, ever more steeply; but the Orcs did not halt. Both
Uglúk and Grishnákh shouted, spurring them on to a last effort.
‘They will make it yet. They will escape,’ thought Pippin. And
then he managed to twist his neck, so as to glance back with one eye
over his shoulder. He saw that riders away eastward were already
level with the Orcs, galloping over the plain. The sunset gilded their
spears and helmets, and glinted in their pale ﬂowing hair. They were
hemming the Orcs in, preventing them from scattering, and driving
them along the line of the river.
He wondered very much what kind of folk they were. He wished
now that he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps
and things; but in those days the plans for the journey seemed to be
in more competent hands, and he had never reckoned with being cut
off from Gandalf, or from Strider, and even from Frodo. All that he
could remember about Rohan was that Gandalf ’s horse, Shadowfax,
had come from that land. That sounded hopeful, as far as it went.
‘But how will they know that we are not Orcs?’ he thought. ‘I
don’t suppose they’ve ever heard of hobbits down here. I suppose I
ought to be glad that the beastly Orcs look like being destroyed, but
I would rather be saved myself.’ The chances were that he and Merry
would be killed together with their captors, before ever the Men of
Rohan were aware of them.
A few of the riders appeared to be bowmen, skilled at shooting
from a running horse. Riding swiftly into range they shot arrows at
the Orcs that straggled behind, and several of them fell; then the
riders wheeled away out of the range of the answering bows of their
enemies, who shot wildly, not daring to halt. This happened many
times, and on one occasion arrows fell among the Isengarders. One
of them, just in front of Pippin, stumbled and did not get up again.
Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many
Orcs had fallen, but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkness
the Orcs came to a hillock. The eaves of the forest were very near, probably no more than three furlongs away, but they could go no further.
The horsemen had encircled them. A small band disobeyed Uglúk’s
command, and ran on towards the forest: only three returned.
‘Well, here we are,’ sneered Grishnákh. ‘Fine leadership! I hope
the great Uglúk will lead us out again.’
‘Put those Halﬂings down!’ ordered Uglúk, taking no notice of
Grishnákh. ‘You, Lugdush, get two others and stand guard over
them! They’re not to be killed, unless the ﬁlthy Whiteskins break

TREEBEARD

465

‘We always seem to have got left out of the old lists, and the old
stories,’ said Merry. ‘Yet we’ve been about for quite a long time.
We’re hobbits.’
‘Why not make a new line?’ said Pippin.
‘Half-grown hobbits, the hole-dwellers.
Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you’ve
got it.’
‘Hm! Not bad, not bad,’ said Treebeard. ‘That would do. So you
live in holes, eh? It sounds very right and proper. Who calls you
hobbits, though? That does not sound Elvish to me. Elves made all
the old words: they began it.’
‘Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,’ said Pippin.
‘Hoom, hmm! Come now! Not so hasty! You call yourselves
hobbits? But you should not go telling just anybody. You’ll be letting
out your own right names if you’re not careful.’
‘We aren’t careful about that,’ said Merry. ‘As a matter of fact
I’m a Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call
me just Merry.’
‘And I’m a Took, Peregrin Took, but I’m generally called Pippin,
or even Pip.’
‘Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,’ said Treebeard. ‘I am honoured
by your conﬁdence; but you should not be too free all at once. There
are Ents and Ents, you know; or there are Ents and things that look
like Ents but ain’t, as you might say. I’ll call you Merry and Pippin,
if you please – nice names. For I am not going to tell you my name,
not yet at any rate.’ A queer half-knowing, half-humorous look came
with a green ﬂicker into his eyes. ‘For one thing it would take a
long while: my name is growing all the time, and I’ve lived a very
long, long time; so my name is like a story. Real names tell you the
story of the things they belong to in my language, in the Old Entish
as you might say. It is a lovely language, but it takes a very long time
to say anything in it, because we do not say anything in it, unless it
is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to.
‘But now,’ and the eyes became very bright and ‘present’, seeming
to grow smaller and almost sharp, ‘what is going on? What are you
doing in it all? I can see and hear (and smell and feel) a great deal from
this, from this, from this a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-burúmë.
Excuse me: that is a part of my name for it; I do not know what the
word is in the outside languages: you know, the thing we are on,
where I stand and look out on ﬁne mornings, and think about the
Sun, and the grass beyond the wood, and the horses, and the clouds,
and the unfolding of the world. What is going on? What is Gandalf

466

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

up to? And these – burárum,’ he made a deep rumbling noise like a
discord on a great organ – ‘these Orcs, and young Saruman down at
Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.’
‘There is quite a lot going on,’ said Merry; ‘and even if we tried
to be quick, it would take a long time to tell. But you told us not to
be hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think
it rude, if we asked what you are going to do with us, and which side
you are on? And did you know Gandalf ?’
‘Yes, I do know him: the only wizard that really cares about trees,’
said Treebeard. ‘Do you know him?’
‘Yes,’ said Pippin sadly, ‘we did. He was a great friend, and he
was our guide.’
‘Then I can answer your other questions,’ said Treebeard. ‘I am
not going to do anything with you: not if you mean by that ‘‘do
something to you’’ without your leave. We might do some things
together. I don’t know about sides. I go my own way; but your way
may go along with mine for a while. But you speak of Master Gandalf,
as if he was in a story that had come to an end.’
‘Yes, we do,’ said Pippin sadly. ‘The story seems to be going on,
but I am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.’
‘Hoo, come now!’ said Treebeard. ‘Hoom, hm, ah well.’ He
paused, looking long at the hobbits. ‘Hoom, ah, well I do not know
what to say. Come now!’
‘If you would like to hear more,’ said Merry, ‘we will tell you. But
it will take some time. Wouldn’t you like to put us down? Couldn’t
we sit here together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting
tired of holding us up.’
‘Hm, tired? No, I am not tired. I do not easily get tired. And I do
not sit down. I am not very, hm, bendable. But there, the Sun is
going in. Let us leave this – did you say what you call it?’
‘Hill?’ suggested Pippin. ‘Shelf ? Step?’ suggested Merry.
Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. ‘Hill. Yes, that was
it. But it is a hasty word for a thing that has stood here ever since
this part of the world was shaped. Never mind. Let us leave it,
and go.’
‘Where shall we go?’ asked Merry.
‘To my home, or one of my homes,’ answered Treebeard.
‘Is it far?’
‘I do not know. You might call it far, perhaps. But what does that
matter?’
‘Well, you see, we have lost all our belongings,’ said Merry. ‘We
have only a little food.’
‘O! Hm! You need not trouble about that,’ said Treebeard. ‘I can
give you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long,

TREEBEARD

467

long while. And if we decide to part company, I can set you down
outside my country at any point you choose. Let us go!’
Holding the hobbits gently but ﬁrmly, one in the crook of each
arm, Treebeard lifted up ﬁrst one large foot and then the other, and
moved them to the edge of the shelf. The rootlike toes grasped the
rocks. Then carefully and solemnly, he stalked down from step to
step, and reached the ﬂoor of the Forest.
At once he set off with long deliberate strides through the trees,
deeper and deeper into the wood, never far from the stream, climbing
steadily up towards the slopes of the mountains. Many of the trees
seemed asleep, or as unaware of him as of any other creature that
merely passed by; but some quivered, and some raised up their
branches above his head as he approached. All the while, as he
walked, he talked to himself in a long running stream of musical
sounds.
The hobbits were silent for some time. They felt, oddly enough,
safe and comfortable, and they had a great deal to think and wonder
about. At last Pippin ventured to speak again.
‘Please, Treebeard,’ he said, ‘could I ask you something? Why did
Celeborn warn us against your forest? He told us not to risk getting
entangled in it.’
‘Hmm, did he now?’ rumbled Treebeard. ‘And I might have said
much the same, if you had been going the other way. Do not risk
getting entangled in the woods of Laurelindórenan! That is what the
Elves used to call it, but now they make the name shorter: Lothlórien
they call it. Perhaps they are right: maybe it is fading, not growing.
Land of the Valley of Singing Gold, that was it, once upon a time.
Now it is the Dreamﬂower. Ah well! But it is a queer place, and not
for just anyone to venture in. I am surprised that you ever got out,
but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not happened
to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land.
‘And so is this. Folk have come to grief here. Aye, they have, to
grief. Laurelindórenan lindelorendor malinornélion ornemalin,’ he
hummed to himself. ‘They are falling rather behind the world in there,
I guess,’ he said. ‘Neither this country, nor anything else outside the
Golden Wood, is what it was when Celeborn was young. Still:
Taurelilómëa-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurëa Lómëanor*
that is what they used to say. Things have changed, but it is still true
in places.’
* See Appendix F under Ents.

472

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He was immensely interested in everything: in the Black Riders,
in Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and Tom Bombadil, in
the Mines of Moria, and in Lothlórien and Galadriel. He made them
describe the Shire and its country over and over again. He said an
odd thing at this point. ‘You never see any, hm, any Ents round
there, do you?’ he asked. ‘Well, not Ents, Entwives I should really
say.’
‘Entwives?’ said Pippin. ‘Are they like you at all?’
‘Yes, hm, well no: I do not really know now,’ said Treebeard
thoughtfully. ‘But they would like your country, so I just wondered.’
Treebeard was however especially interested in everything that
concerned Gandalf; and most interested of all in Saruman’s doings.
The hobbits regretted very much that they knew so little about them:
only a rather vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told the
Council. But they were clear at any rate that Uglúk and his troop
came from Isengard, and spoke of Saruman as their master.
‘Hm, hoom!’ said Treebeard, when at last their story had wound
and wandered down to the battle of the Orcs and the Riders of
Rohan. ‘Well, well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You
have not told me all, no indeed, not by a long way. But I do not
doubt that you are doing as Gandalf would wish. There is something
very big going on, that I can see, and what it is maybe I shall learn
in good time, or in bad time. By root and twig, but it is a strange
business: up sprout a little folk that are not in the old lists, and behold!
the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and Gandalf takes
them on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras
Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the leagues of Wilderland:
indeed they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they
weather it!’
‘And what about yourself ?’ asked Merry.
‘Hoom, hm, I have not troubled about the Great Wars,’ said
Treebeard; ‘they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business
of Wizards: Wizards are always troubled about the future. I do not
like worrying about the future. I am not altogether on anybody’s side,
because nobody is altogether on my side, if you understand me:
nobody cares for the woods as I care for them, not even Elves nowadays. Still, I take more kindly to Elves than to others: it was the
Elves that cured us of dumbness long ago, and that was a great gift
that cannot be forgotten, though our ways have parted since. And
there are some things, of course, whose side I am altogether not on;
I am against them altogether: these – burárum’ (he again made a deep
rumble of disgust) ‘——these Orcs, and their masters.
‘I used to be anxious when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but
when it removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while: Mordor

492

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Let us go up and look about us!’ said Legolas. ‘I still feel my
breath short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.’
The companions climbed up. Aragorn came last, moving slowly:
he was scanning the steps and ledges closely.
‘I am almost sure that the hobbits have been up here,’ he said.
‘But there are other marks, very strange marks, which I do not understand. I wonder if we can see anything from this ledge which will
help us to guess which way they went next?’
He stood up and looked about, but he saw nothing that was of
any use. The shelf faced southward and eastward; but only on the
east was the view open. There he could see the heads of the trees
descending in ranks towards the plain from which they had come.
‘We have journeyed a long way round,’ said Legolas. ‘We could
have all come here safe together, if we had left the Great River on
the second or third day and struck west. Few can foresee whither
their road will lead them, till they come to its end.’
‘But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,’ said Gimli.
‘Yet here we are – and nicely caught in the net,’ said Legolas.
‘Look!’
‘Look at what?’ said Gimli.
‘There in the trees.’
‘Where? I have not elf-eyes.’
‘Hush! Speak more softly! Look!’ said Legolas pointing. ‘Down in
the wood, back in the way that we have just come. It is he. Cannot
you see him, passing from tree to tree?’
‘I see, I see now!’ hissed Gimli. ‘Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn
you? There is the old man. All in dirty grey rags: that is why I could
not see him at ﬁrst.’
Aragorn looked and beheld a bent ﬁgure moving slowly. It was
not far away. It looked like an old beggar-man, walking wearily,
leaning on a rough staff. His head was bowed, and he did not look
towards them. In other lands they would have greeted him with kind
words; but now they stood silent, each feeling a strange expectancy:
something was approaching that held a hidden power – or menace.
Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the ﬁgure
drew nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he
burst out: ‘Your bow, Legolas! Bend it! Get ready! It is Saruman.
Do not let him speak, or put a spell upon us! Shoot ﬁrst!’
Legolas took his bow and bent it, slowly and as if some other will
resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not ﬁt it
to the string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent.
‘Why are you waiting? What is the matter with you?’ said Gimli
in a hissing whisper.
‘Legolas is right,’ said Aragorn quietly. ‘We may not shoot an old

THE WHITE RIDER

493

man so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be
on us. Watch and wait!’
At that moment the old man quickened his pace and came with
surprising speed to the foot of the rock-wall. Then suddenly he looked
up, while they stood motionless looking down. There was no sound.
They could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he
wore a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his features were overshadowed,
except for the end of his nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed to
Aragorn that he caught the gleam of eyes keen and bright from within
the shadow of the hooded brows.
At last the old man broke the silence. ‘Well met indeed, my
friends,’ he said in a soft voice. ‘I wish to speak to you. Will you
come down, or shall I come up?’ Without waiting for an answer he
began to climb.
‘Now!’ cried Gimli. ‘Stop him, Legolas!’
‘Did I not say that I wished to speak to you?’ said the old man.
‘Put away that bow, Master Elf !’
The bow and arrow fell from Legolas’ hands, and his arms hung
loose at his sides.
‘And you, Master Dwarf, pray take your hand from your axe-haft,
till I am up! You will not need such arguments.’
Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old
man sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a goat. All weariness
seemed to have left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was
a gleam, too brief for certainty, a quick glint of white, as if some
garment shrouded by the grey rags had been for an instant revealed.
The intake of Gimli’s breath could be heard as a loud hiss in the
silence.
‘Well met, I say again!’ said the old man, coming towards them.
When he was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with
his head thrust forward, peering at them from under his hood. ‘And
what may you be doing in these parts? An Elf, a Man, and a Dwarf,
all clad in Elvish fashion. No doubt there is a tale worth hearing
behind it all. Such things are not often seen here.’
‘You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,’ said Aragorn. ‘Is that
so?’
‘Not well,’ said the old man: ‘that would be the study of many
lives. But I come here now and again.’
‘Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have
to say to us?’ said Aragorn. ‘The morning passes, and we have an
errand that will not wait.’
‘As for what I wished to say, I have said it: What may you be

494

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

doing, and what tale can you tell of yourselves? As for my name!’ He
broke off, laughing long and softly. Aragorn felt a shudder run
through him at the sound, a strange cold thrill; and yet it was not
fear or terror that he felt: rather it was like the sudden bite of a keen
air, or the slap of a cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper.
‘My name!’ said the old man again. ‘Have you not guessed it
already? You have heard it before, I think. Yes, you have heard it
before. But come now, what of your tale?’
The three companions stood silent and made no answer.
‘There are some who would begin to doubt whether your errand
is ﬁt to tell,’ said the old man. ‘Happily I know something of it. You
are tracking the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hobbits. Don’t stare, as if you had never heard the strange name before.
You have, and so have I. Well, they climbed up here the day before
yesterday; and they met someone that they did not expect. Does that
comfort you? And now you would like to know where they were
taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news about that. But
why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent
as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.’
The old man turned away and went towards a heap of fallen stones
and rock at the foot of the cliff behind. Immediately, as if a spell had
been removed, the others relaxed and stirred. Gimli’s hand went at
once to his axe-haft. Aragorn drew his sword. Legolas picked up his
bow.
The old man took no notice, but stooped and sat himself on a
low ﬂat stone. Then his grey cloak drew apart, and they saw, beyond
doubt, that he was clothed beneath all in white.
‘Saruman!’ cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand.
‘Speak! Tell us where you have hidden our friends! What have you
done with them? Speak, or I will make a dint in your hat that even
a wizard will ﬁnd it hard to deal with!’
The old man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and
leaped to the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly
tall, towering above them. His hood and his grey rags were ﬂung
away. His white garments shone. He lifted up his staff, and Gimli’s
axe leaped from his grasp and fell ringing on the ground. The sword
of Aragorn, stiff in his motionless hand, blazed with a sudden ﬁre.
Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high into the air: it
vanished in a ﬂash of ﬂame.
‘Mithrandir!’ he cried. ‘Mithrandir!’
‘Well met, I say to you again, Legolas!’ said the old man.
They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in the sunshine;
and gleaming white was his robe; the eyes under his deep brows were

THE WHITE RIDER

495

bright, piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between
wonder, joy, and fear they stood and found no words to say.
At last Aragorn stirred. ‘Gandalf !’ he said. ‘Beyond all hope you
return to us in our need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf !’
Gimli said nothing, but sank to his knees, shading his eyes.
‘Gandalf,’ the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory
a long disused word. ‘Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.’
He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak
wrapped it about him: it seemed as if the sun had been shining, but
now was hid in cloud again. ‘Yes, you may still call me Gandalf,’ he
said, and the voice was the voice of their old friend and guide. ‘Get
up, my good Gimli! No blame to you, and no harm done to me.
Indeed my friends, none of you have any weapon that could hurt
me. Be merry! We meet again. At the turn of the tide. The great
storm is coming, but the tide has turned.’
He laid his hand on Gimli’s head, and the Dwarf looked up and
laughed suddenly. ‘Gandalf !’ he said. ‘But you are all in white!’
‘Yes, I am white now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Indeed I am Saruman, one
might almost say, Saruman as he should have been. But come now,
tell me of yourselves! I have passed through ﬁre and deep water,
since we parted. I have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and
learned again much that I had forgotten. I can see many things far
off, but many things that are close at hand I cannot see. Tell me of
yourselves!’
‘What do you wish to know?’ said Aragorn. ‘All that has happened
since we parted on the bridge would be a long tale. Will you not ﬁrst
give us news of the hobbits? Did you ﬁnd them, and are they safe?’
‘No, I did not ﬁnd them,’ said Gandalf. ‘There was a darkness
over the valleys of the Emyn Muil, and I did not know of their
captivity, until the eagle told me.’
‘The eagle!’ said Legolas. ‘I have seen an eagle high and far off:
the last time was four days ago, above the Emyn Muil.’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘that was Gwaihir the Windlord, who rescued
me from Orthanc. I sent him before me to watch the River and gather
tidings. His sight is keen, but he cannot see all that passes under hill
and tree. Some things he has seen, and others I have seen myself.
The Ring now has passed beyond my help, or the help of any of the
Company that set out from Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to
the Enemy, but it escaped. I had some part in that: for I sat in a high
place, and I strove with the Dark Tower; and the Shadow passed.
Then I was weary, very weary; and I walked long in dark thought.’
‘Then you know about Frodo!’ said Gimli. ‘How do things go
with him?’

496

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before
him still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is
all that I can say.’
‘Not alone,’ said Legolas. ‘We think that Sam went with him.’
‘Did he!’ said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a
smile on his face. ‘Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not
surprise me. Good! Very good! You lighten my heart. You must tell
me more. Now sit by me and tell me the tale of your journey.’
The companions sat on the ground at his feet, and Aragorn took
up the tale. For a long while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no
questions. His hands were spread upon his knees, and his eyes were
closed. At last when Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of
his last journey upon the Great River, the old man sighed.
‘You have not said all that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend,’
he said quietly. ‘Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to
him. It was a sore trial for such a man: a warrior, and a lord of men.
Galadriel told me that he was in peril. But he escaped in the end. I
am glad. It was not in vain that the young hobbits came with us, if
only for Boromir’s sake. But that is not the only part they have to
play. They were brought to Fangorn, and their coming was like the
falling of small stones that starts an avalanche in the mountains. Even
as we talk here, I hear the ﬁrst rumblings. Saruman had best not be
caught away from home when the dam bursts!’
‘In one thing you have not changed, dear friend,’ said Aragorn:
‘you still speak in riddles.’
‘What? In riddles?’ said Gandalf. ‘No! For I was talking aloud to
myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present to
speak to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.’
He laughed, but the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam
of sunshine.
‘I am no longer young even in the reckoning of Men of the Ancient
Houses,’ said Aragorn. ‘Will you not open your mind more clearly
to me?’
‘What then shall I say?’ said Gandalf, and paused for a while in
thought. ‘This in brief is how I see things at the moment, if you wish
to have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of
course, has long known that the Ring is abroad, and that it is borne
by a hobbit. He knows now the number of our Company that set
out from Rivendell, and the kind of each of us. But he does not yet
perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes that we were all going to
Minas Tirith; for that is what he would himself have done in our
place. And according to his wisdom it would have been a heavy stroke
against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what mighty

THE WHITE RIDER

497

one may suddenly appear, wielding the Ring, and assailing him with
war, seeking to cast him down and take his place. That we should
wish to cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought
that occurs to his mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself
has not yet entered into his darkest dream. In which no doubt you
will see our good fortune and our hope. For imagining war he has
let loose war, believing that he has no time to waste; for he that
strikes the ﬁrst blow, if he strikes it hard enough, may need to strike
no more. So the forces that he has long been preparing he is now
setting in motion, sooner than he intended. Wise fool. For if he had
used all his power to guard Mordor, so that none could enter, and
bent all his guile to the hunting of the Ring, then indeed hope would
have faded: neither Ring nor bearer could long have eluded him. But
now his eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he
looks towards Minas Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon
it like a storm.
‘For already he knows that the messengers that he sent to waylay
the Company have failed again. They have not found the Ring.
Neither have they brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they
done even so much as that, it would have been a heavy blow to us,
and it might have been fatal. But let us not darken our hearts by
imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the Dark Tower. For the
Enemy has failed – so far. Thanks to Saruman.’
‘Then is not Saruman a traitor?’ said Gimli.
‘Indeed yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘Doubly. And is not that strange? Nothing that we have endured of late has seemed so grievous as the treason
of Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown
very strong. He threatens the Men of Rohan and draws off their help
from Minas Tirith, even as the main blow is approaching from the
East. Yet a treacherous weapon is ever a danger to the hand. Saruman
also had a mind to capture the Ring, for himself, or at least to snare
some hobbits for his evil purposes. So between them our enemies
have contrived only to bring Merry and Pippin with marvellous speed,
and in the nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they would
never have come at all!
‘Also they have ﬁlled themselves with new doubts that disturb
their plans. No tidings of the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to
the horsemen of Rohan; but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits
were taken in the Emyn Muil and borne away towards Isengard
against the will of his own servants. He now has Isengard to fear as
well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls, it will go ill with Saruman.’
‘It is a pity that our friends lie in between,’ said Gimli. ‘If no land
divided Isengard and Mordor, then they could ﬁght while we watched
and waited.’

498

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘The victor would emerge stronger than either, and free from
doubt,’ said Gandalf. ‘But Isengard cannot ﬁght Mordor, unless
Saruman ﬁrst obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does
not yet know his peril. There is much that he does not know. He
was so eager to lay his hands on his prey that he could not wait at
home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on his messengers. But
he came too late, for once, and the battle was over and beyond his
help before he reached these parts. He did not remain here long. I
look into his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He
believes that the horsemen slew and burned all upon the ﬁeld of
battle; but he does not know whether the Orcs were bringing any
prisoners or not. And he does not know of the quarrel between his
servants and the Orcs of Mordor; nor does he know of the Winged
Messenger.’
‘The Winged Messenger!’ cried Legolas. ‘I shot at him with the
bow of Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled him from the sky.
He ﬁlled us all with fear. What new terror is this?’
‘One that you cannot slay with arrows,’ said Gandalf. ‘You only
slew his steed. It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed
again. For he was a Nazgûl, one of the Nine, who ride now upon
winged steeds. Soon their terror will overshadow the last armies of
our friends, cutting off the sun. But they have not yet been allowed
to cross the River, and Saruman does not know of this new shape in
which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought is ever on the
Ring. Was it present in the battle? Was it found? What if Théoden,
Lord of the Mark, should come by it and learn of its power? That is
the danger that he sees, and he has ﬂed back to Isengard to double
and treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another
danger, close at hand, which he does not see, busy with his ﬁery
thoughts. He has forgotten Treebeard.’
‘Now you speak to yourself again,’ said Aragorn with a smile.
‘Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of Saruman’s
double treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two
hobbits to Fangorn has served, save to give us a long and fruitless
chase.’
‘Wait a minute!’ cried Gimli. ‘There is another thing that I should
like to know ﬁrst. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last
night?’
‘You certainly did not see me,’ answered Gandalf, ‘therefore I
must guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike
that your desire to make an incurable dent in my hat must be
excused.’
‘Good, good!’ said Gimli. ‘I am glad that it was not you.’
Gandalf laughed again. ‘Yes, my good Dwarf,’ he said, ‘it is a

THE WHITE RIDER

499

comfort not to be mistaken at all points. Do I not know it only too
well! But, of course, I never blamed you for your welcome of me.
How could I do so, who have so often counselled my friends to
suspect even their own hands when dealing with the Enemy. Bless
you, Gimli, son of Glóin! Maybe you will see us both together one
day and judge between us!’
‘But the hobbits!’ Legolas broke in. ‘We have come far to seek
them, and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?’
‘With Treebeard and the Ents,’ said Gandalf.
‘The Ents!’ exclaimed Aragorn. ‘Then there is truth in the old
legends about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds
of the trees? Are there still Ents in the world? I thought they were
only a memory of ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than
a legend of Rohan.’
‘A legend of Rohan!’ cried Legolas. ‘Nay, every Elf in Wilderland
has sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even
among us they are only a memory. If I were to meet one still walking
in this world, then indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard:
that is only a rendering of Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet
you seem to speak of a person. Who is this Treebeard?’
‘Ah! now you are asking much,’ said Gandalf. ‘The little that I
know of his long slow story would make a tale for which we have no
time now. Treebeard is Fangorn, the guardian of the forest; he is the
oldest of the Ents, the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the
Sun upon this Middle-earth. I hope indeed, Legolas, that you may
yet meet him. Merry and Pippin have been fortunate: they met him
here, even where we sit. For he came here two days ago and bore
them away to his dwelling far off by the roots of the mountains. He
often comes here, especially when his mind is uneasy, and rumours
of the world outside trouble him. I saw him four days ago striding
among the trees, and I think he saw me, for he paused; but I did not
speak, for I was heavy with thought, and weary after my struggle with
the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.’
‘Perhaps he also thought that you were Saruman,’ said Gimli.
‘But you speak of him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was
dangerous.’
‘Dangerous!’ cried Gandalf. ‘And so am I, very dangerous: more
dangerous than anything you will ever meet, unless you are brought
alive before the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous,
and Legolas is dangerous. You are beset with dangers, Gimli son of
Glóin; for you are dangerous yourself, in your own fashion. Certainly
the forest of Fangorn is perilous – not least to those that are too
ready with their axes; and Fangorn himself, he is perilous too; yet
he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now his long slow wrath is

500

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

brimming over, and all the forest is ﬁlled with it. The coming of the
hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: it will soon
be running like a ﬂood; but its tide is turned against Saruman and
the axes of Isengard. A thing is about to happen which has not
happened since the Elder Days: the Ents are going to wake up and
ﬁnd that they are strong.’
‘What will they do?’ asked Legolas in astonishment.
‘I do not know,’ said Gandalf. ‘I do not think they know themselves. I wonder.’ He fell silent, his head bowed in thought.
The others looked at him. A gleam of sun through ﬂeeting clouds
fell on his hands, which lay now upturned on his lap: they seemed
to be ﬁlled with light as a cup is with water. At last he looked up
and gazed straight at the sun.
‘The morning is wearing away,’ he said. ‘Soon we must go.’
‘Do we go to ﬁnd our friends and to see Treebeard?’ asked Aragorn.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘That is not the road that you must take. I
have spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory.
War is upon us and all our friends, a war in which only the use of
the Ring could give us surety of victory. It ﬁlls me with great sorrow
and great fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am
Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.’
He rose and gazed out eastward, shading his eyes, as if he saw
things far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head.
‘No,’ he said in a soft voice, ‘it has gone beyond our reach. Of that
at least let us be glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring.
We must go down to face a peril near despair, yet that deadly peril
is removed.’
He turned. ‘Come, Aragorn son of Arathorn!’ he said. ‘Do not
regret your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil, nor call it a vain
pursuit. You chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the choice
was just, and it has been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who
otherwise might have met too late. But the quest of your companions
is over. Your next journey is marked by your given word. You must
go to Edoras and seek out Théoden in his hall. For you are needed.
The light of Andúril must now be uncovered in the battle for which
it has so long waited. There is war in Rohan, and worse evil: it goes
ill with Théoden.’
‘Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?’ said
Legolas.
‘I did not say so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Who knows? Have patience. Go
where you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.’
‘It is a long way for a man to walk, young or old,’ said Aragorn.
‘I fear the battle will be over long ere I come there.’

THE WHITE RIDER

501

‘We shall see, we shall see,’ said Gandalf. ‘Will you come now
with me?’
‘Yes, we will set out together,’ said Aragorn. ‘But I do not doubt
that you will come there before me, if you wish.’ He rose and looked
long at Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood
there facing one another. The grey ﬁgure of the Man, Aragorn son
of Arathorn, was tall, and stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of
his sword; he looked as if some king out of the mists of the sea had
stepped upon the shores of lesser men. Before him stooped the old
ﬁgure, white, shining now as if with some light kindled within, bent,
laden with years, but holding a power beyond the strength of kings.
‘Do I not say truly, Gandalf,’ said Aragorn at last, ‘that you could
go whithersoever you wished quicker than I? And this I also say: you
are our captain and our banner. The Dark Lord has Nine. But we
have One, mightier than they: the White Rider. He has passed
through the ﬁre and the abyss, and they shall fear him. We will go
where he leads.’
‘Yes, together we will follow you,’ said Legolas. ‘But ﬁrst, it would
ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you in Moria. Will you
not tell us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were
delivered?’
‘I have stayed already too long,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Time is short.
But if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.’
‘Then tell us what you will, and time allows!’ said Gimli. ‘Come,
Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!’
‘Name him not!’ said Gandalf, and for a moment it seemed that
a cloud of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as
death. ‘Long time I fell,’ he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back
with difﬁculty. ‘Long I fell, and he fell with me. His ﬁre was about
me. I was burned. Then we plunged into the deep water and all was
dark. Cold it was as the tide of death: almost it froze my heart.’
‘Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin’s Bridge, and none
has measured it,’ said Gimli.
‘Yet it has a bottom, beyond light and knowledge,’ said Gandalf.
‘Thither I came at last, to the uttermost foundations of stone. He
was with me still. His ﬁre was quenched, but now he was a thing of
slime, stronger than a strangling snake.
‘We fought far under the living earth, where time is not counted.
Ever he clutched me, and ever I hewed him, till at last he ﬂed into
dark tunnels. They were not made by Durin’s folk, Gimli son of
Glóin. Far, far below the deepest delvings of the Dwarves, the world
is gnawed by nameless things. Even Sauron knows them not. They
are older than he. Now I have walked there, but I will bring no report

502

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

to darken the light of day. In that despair my enemy was my only
hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel. Thus he brought me
back at last to the secret ways of Khazad-dûm: too well he knew
them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.’
‘Long has that been lost,’ said Gimli. ‘Many have said that it was
never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.’
‘It was made, and it had not been destroyed,’ said Gandalf. ‘From
the lowest dungeon to the highest peak it climbed, ascending in
unbroken spiral in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in
Durin’s Tower carved in the living rock of Zirakzigil, the pinnacle of
the Silvertine.
‘There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before
it lay a narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world. The
sun shone ﬁercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud. Out
he sprang, and even as I came behind, he burst into new ﬂame. There
was none to see, or perhaps in after ages songs would still be sung
of the Battle of the Peak.’ Suddenly Gandalf laughed. ‘But what
would they say in song? Those that looked up from afar thought that
the mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard, and
lightning, they said, smote upon Celebdil, and leaped back broken
into tongues of ﬁre. Is not that enough? A great smoke rose about
us, vapour and steam. Ice fell like rain. I threw down my enemy, and
he fell from the high place and broke the mountain-side where he
smote it in his ruin. Then darkness took me, and I strayed out of
thought and time, and I wandered far on roads that I will not tell.
‘Naked I was sent back – for a brief time, until my task is done.
And naked I lay upon the mountain-top. The tower behind was
crumbled into dust, the window gone; the ruined stair was choked
with burned and broken stone. I was alone, forgotten, without escape
upon the hard horn of the world. There I lay staring upward, while
the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long as a life-age of the
earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all lands: the
springing and the dying, the song and the weeping, and the slow
everlasting groan of over-burdened stone. And so at the last Gwaihir
the Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away.
‘ ‘‘Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,’’ I said.
‘ ‘‘A burden you have been,’’ he answered, ‘‘but not so now. Light
as a swan’s feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines through you.
Indeed I do not think you need me any more: were I to let you fall,
you would ﬂoat upon the wind.’’
‘ ‘‘Do not let me fall!’’ I gasped, for I felt life in me again. ‘‘Bear
me to Lothlórien!’’
‘ ‘‘That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent
me to look for you,’’ he answered.

THE WHITE RIDER

503

‘Thus it was that I came to Caras Galadhon and found you but
lately gone. I tarried there in the ageless time of that land where days
bring healing not decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed in white.
Counsel I gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came,
and messages I bring to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to
say this:
Where now are the Dúnedain, Elessar, Elessar?
Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar?
Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth,
And the Grey Company ride from the North.
But dark is the path appointed for thee:
The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.
To Legolas she sent this word:
Legolas Greenleaf long under tree
In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea!
If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore,
Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.’
Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.
‘Then she sent me no message?’ said Gimli and bent his head.
‘Dark are her words,’ said Legolas, ‘and little do they mean to
those that receive them.’
‘That is no comfort,’ said Gimli.
‘What then?’ said Legolas. ‘Would you have her speak openly to
you of your death?’
‘Yes, if she had naught else to say.’
‘What is that?’ said Gandalf, opening his eyes. ‘Yes, I think I can
guess what her words may mean. Your pardon, Gimli! I was pondering the messages once again. But indeed she sent words to you,
and neither dark nor sad.
‘ ‘‘To Gimli son of Glóin,’’ she said, ‘‘give his Lady’s greeting.
Lockbearer, wherever thou goest my thought goes with thee. But
have a care to lay thine axe to the right tree!’’ ’
‘In happy hour you have returned to us, Gandalf,’ cried the Dwarf,
capering as he sang loudly in the strange dwarf-tongue. ‘Come,
come!’ he shouted, swinging his axe. ‘Since Gandalf ’s head is now
sacred, let us ﬁnd one that it is right to cleave!’
‘That will not be far to seek,’ said Gandalf, rising from his seat.
‘Come! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of
parted friends. Now there is need of haste.’
*
*
*

504

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He wrapped himself again in his old tattered cloak, and led the
way. Following him they descended quickly from the high shelf and
made their way back through the forest, down the bank of the
Entwash. They spoke no more words, until they stood again upon
the grass beyond the eaves of Fangorn. There was no sign of their
horses to be seen.
‘They have not returned,’ said Legolas. ‘It will be a weary walk!’
‘I shall not walk. Time presses,’ said Gandalf. Then lifting up his
head he gave a long whistle. So clear and piercing was the note that
the others stood amazed to hear such a sound come from those old
bearded lips. Three times he whistled; and then faint and far off it
seemed to them that they heard the whinny of a horse borne up from
the plains upon the eastern wind. They waited wondering. Before
long there came the sound of hoofs, at ﬁrst hardly more than a tremor
of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as he lay upon the grass,
then growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick beat.
‘There is more than one horse coming,’ said Aragorn.
‘Certainly,’ said Gandalf. ‘We are too great a burden for one.’
‘There are three,’ said Legolas, gazing out over the plain. ‘See
how they run! There is Hasufel, and there is my friend Arod beside
him! But there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I
have not seen his like before.’
‘Nor will you again,’ said Gandalf. ‘That is Shadowfax. He is the
chief of the Mearas, lords of horses, and not even Théoden, King of
Rohan, has ever looked on a better. Does he not shine like silver,
and run as smoothly as a swift stream? He has come for me: the
horse of the White Rider. We are going to battle together.’
Even as the old wizard spoke, the great horse came striding up
the slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane ﬂowing
in the wind of his speed. The two others followed, now far behind.
As soon as Shadowfax saw Gandalf, he checked his pace and whinnied loudly; then trotting gently forward he stooped his proud head
and nuzzled his great nostrils against the old man’s neck.
Gandalf caressed him. ‘It is a long way from Rivendell, my friend,’
he said; ‘but you are wise and swift and come at need. Far let us ride
now together, and part not in this world again!’
Soon the other horses came up and stood quietly by, as if awaiting
orders. ‘We go at once to Meduseld, the hall of your master,
Théoden,’ said Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their
heads. ‘Time presses, so with your leave, my friends, we will ride.
We beg you to use all the speed that you can. Hasufel shall bear
Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli before me, and by his
leave Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now only to drink
a little.’

THE WHITE RIDER

505

‘Now I understand a part of last night’s riddle,’ said Legolas as
he sprang lightly upon Arod’s back. ‘Whether they ﬂed at ﬁrst in
fear, or not, our horses met Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted
him with joy. Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf ?’
‘Yes, I knew,’ said the wizard. ‘I bent my thought upon him,
bidding him to make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south
of this land. Swiftly may he bear me back again!’
Gandalf spoke now to Shadowfax, and the horse set off at a good
pace, yet not beyond the measure of the others. After a little while
he turned suddenly, and choosing a place where the banks were
lower, he waded the river, and then led them away due south into a
ﬂat land, treeless and wide. The wind went like grey waves through
the endless miles of grass. There was no sign of road or track, but
Shadowfax did not stay or falter.
‘He is steering a straight course now for the halls of Théoden
under the slopes of the White Mountains,’ said Gandalf. ‘It will be
quicker so. The ground is ﬁrmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief
northward track lies, across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way
through every fen and hollow.’
For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands.
Often the grass was so high that it reached above the knees of the
riders, and their steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea.
They came upon many hidden pools, and broad acres of sedge waving
above wet and treacherous bogs; but Shadowfax found the way, and
the other horses followed in his swath. Slowly the sun fell from the
sky down into the West. Looking out over the great plain, far away
the riders saw it for a moment like a red ﬁre sinking into the grass.
Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red
upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun’s
disc to the hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed
down under the rim of earth.
‘There lies the Gap of Rohan,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is now almost due
west of us. That way lies Isengard.’
‘I see a great smoke,’ said Legolas. ‘What may that be?’
‘Battle and war!’ said Gandalf. ‘Ride on!’

Chapter 6
THE KING OF THE
GOLDEN HALL
They rode on through sunset, and slow dusk, and gathering night.
When at last they halted and dismounted, even Aragorn was stiff and
weary. Gandalf only allowed them a few hours’ rest. Legolas and
Gimli slept, and Aragorn lay ﬂat, stretched upon his back; but Gandalf stood, leaning on his staff, gazing into the darkness, east and
west. All was silent, and there was no sign or sound of living thing.
The night was barred with long clouds, ﬂeeting on a chill wind, when
they arose again. Under the cold moon they went on once more, as
swift as by the light of day.
Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would
have fallen from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him.
Hasufel and Arod, weary but proud, followed their tireless leader, a
grey shadow before them hardly to be seen. The miles went by. The
waxing moon sank into the cloudy West.
A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark faded
to a cold grey. Red shafts of light leapt above the black walls of the
Emyn Muil far away upon their left. Dawn came clear and bright; a
wind swept across their path, rushing through the bent grasses. Suddenly Shadowfax stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead.
‘Look!’ he cried, and they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood
the mountains of the South: white-tipped and streaked with black.
The grass-lands rolled against the hills that clustered at their feet,
and ﬂowed up into many valleys still dim and dark, untouched by the
light of dawn, winding their way into the heart of the great mountains.
Immediately before the travellers the widest of these glens opened
like a long gulf among the hills. Far inward they glimpsed a tumbled
mountain-mass with one tall peak; at the mouth of the vale there
stood like a sentinel a lonely height. About its feet there ﬂowed, as
a thread of silver, the stream that issued from the dale; upon its brow
they caught, still far away, a glint in the rising sun, a glimmer of gold.
‘Speak, Legolas!’ said Gandalf. ‘Tell us what you see there before
us!’
Legolas gazed ahead, shading his eyes from the level shafts of the
new-risen sun. ‘I see a white stream that comes down from the snows,’
he said. ‘Where it issues from the shadow of the vale a green hill

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

507

rises upon the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle
it. Within there rise the roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon
a green terrace, there stands aloft a great hall of Men. And it seems
to my eyes that it is thatched with gold. The light of it shines far
over the land. Golden, too, are the posts of its doors. There men in
bright mail stand; but all else within the courts are yet asleep.’
‘Edoras those courts are called,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Meduseld is
that golden hall. There dwells Théoden son of Thengel, King of the
Mark of Rohan. We are come with the rising of the day. Now the
road lies plain to see before us. But we must ride more warily; for
war is abroad, and the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, do not sleep, even
if it seem so from afar. Draw no weapon, speak no haughty word, I
counsel you all, until we are come before Théoden’s seat.’
The morning was bright and clear about them, and birds were
singing, when the travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly
into the plain, and beyond the feet of the hills turned across their
path in a wide bend, ﬂowing away east to feed the Entwash far off
in its reed-choked beds. The land was green: in the wet meads and
along the grassy borders of the stream grew many willow-trees.
Already in this southern land they were blushing red at their ﬁngertips, feeling the approach of spring. Over the stream there was a ford
between low banks much trampled by the passage of horses. The
travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading
towards the uplands.
At the foot of the walled hill the way ran under the shadow of
many mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass
was white as with a drifted snow: small ﬂowers sprang there like
countless stars amid the turf.
‘Look!’ said Gandalf. ‘How fair are the bright eyes in the grass!
Evermind they are called, simbelmynë in this land of Men, for they
blossom in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men
rest. Behold! we are come to the great barrows where the sires of
Théoden sleep.’
‘Seven mounds upon the left, and nine upon the right,’ said Aragorn.
‘Many long lives of men it is since the golden hall was built.’
‘Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my
home since then,’ said Legolas, ‘and but a little while does that seem
to us.’
‘But to the Riders of the Mark it seems so long ago,’ said Aragorn,
‘that the raising of this house is but a memory of song, and the years
before are lost in the mist of time. Now they call this land their home,
their own, and their speech is sundered from their northern kin.’
Then he began to chant softly in a slow tongue unknown to the

508

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Elf and Dwarf; yet they listened, for there was a strong music in it.
‘That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,’ said Legolas; ‘for
it is like to this land itself; rich and rolling in part, and else hard and
stern as the mountains. But I cannot guess what it means, save that
it is laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.’
‘It runs thus in the Common Speech,’ said Aragorn, ‘as near as I
can make it.
Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was
blowing?
Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair ﬂowing?
Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red ﬁre glowing?
Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing?
They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the
meadow;
The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.
Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning,
Or behold the ﬂowing years from the Sea returning?
Thus spoke a forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall
and fair was Eorl the Young, who rode down out of the North; and
there were wings upon the feet of his steed, Felaróf, father of horses.
So men still sing in the evening.’
With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the winding way up the green shoulders of the hills, they came
at last to the wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.
There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their
feet and barred the way with spears. ‘Stay, strangers here unknown!’
they cried in the tongue of the Riddermark, demanding the names
and errand of the strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friendliness; and they looked darkly upon Gandalf.
‘Well do I understand your speech,’ he answered in the same
language; ‘yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in
the Common Tongue, as is the custom in the West, if you wish to
be answered?’
‘It is the will of Théoden King that none should enter his gates,
save those who know our tongue and are our friends,’ replied one of
the guards. ‘None are welcome here in days of war but our own folk,
and those that come from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who
are you that come heedless over the plain thus strangely clad, riding
horses like to our own horses? Long have we kept guard here, and
we have watched you from afar. Never have we seen other riders so
strange, nor any horse more proud than is one of these that bear you.
He is one of the Mearas, unless our eyes are cheated by some spell.

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

509

Say, are you not a wizard, some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of
his craft? Speak now and be swift!’
‘We are no phantoms,’ said Aragorn, ‘nor do your eyes cheat you.
For indeed these are your own horses that we ride, as you knew well
ere you asked, I guess. But seldom does thief ride home to the stable.
´
Here are Hasufel and Arod, that Eomer,
the Third Marshal of the
Mark, lent to us, only two days ago. We bring them back now, even
´
as we promised him. Has not Eomer
then returned and given warning
of our coming?’
´
A troubled look came into the guard’s eyes. ‘Of Eomer
I have
naught to say,’ he answered. ‘If what you tell me is truth, then doubtless Théoden will have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not
wholly unlooked-for. It is but two nights ago that Wormtongue came
to us and said that by the will of Théoden no stranger should pass
these gates.’
‘Wormtongue?’ said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. ‘Say
no more! My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the
Mark himself. I am in haste. Will you not go or send to say that we
are come?’ His eyes glinted under his deep brows as he bent his gaze
upon the man.
‘Yes, I will go,’ he answered slowly. ‘But what names shall I report?
And what shall I say of you? Old and weary you seem now, and yet
you are fell and grim beneath, I deem.’
‘Well do you see and speak,’ said the wizard. ‘For I am Gandalf.
I have returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is
Shadowfax the Great, whom no other hand can tame. And here
beside me is Aragorn son of Arathorn, the heir of Kings, and it is to
Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas the Elf and Gimli the
Dwarf, our comrades. Go now and say to your master that we are
at his gates and would have speech with him, if he will permit us to
come into his hall.’
‘Strange names you give indeed! But I will report them as you
bid, and learn my master’s will,’ said the guard. ‘Wait here a little
while, and I will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do
not hope too much! These are dark days.’ He went swiftly away,
leaving the strangers in the watchful keeping of his comrades.
After some time he returned. ‘Follow me!’ he said. ‘Théoden gives
you leave to enter; but any weapon that you bear, be it only a staff,
you must leave on the threshold. The doorwardens will keep them.’
The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking
in ﬁle behind their guide. They found a broad path, paved with hewn
stones, now winding upward, now climbing in short ﬂights of well-laid
steps. Many houses built of wood and many dark doors they passed.

510

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Beside the way in a stone channel a stream of clear water ﬂowed,
sparkling and chattering. At length they came to the crown of the
hill. There stood a high platform above a green terrace, at the foot
of which a bright spring gushed from a stone carved in the likeness
of a horse’s head; beneath was a wide basin from which the water
spilled and fed the falling stream. Up the green terrace went a stair
of stone, high and broad, and on either side of the topmost step were
stone-hewn seats. There sat other guards, with drawn swords laid
upon their knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders;
the sun was blazoned upon their green shields, their long corslets
were burnished bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than
mortal men.
‘There are the doors before you,’ said the guide. ‘I must return
now to my duty at the gate. Farewell! And may the Lord of the Mark
be gracious to you!’
He turned and went swiftly back down the road. The others
climbed the long stair under the eyes of the tall watchmen. Silent
they stood now above and spoke no word, until Gandalf stepped out
upon the paved terrace at the stair’s head. Then suddenly with clear
voices they spoke a courteous greeting in their own tongue.
‘Hail, comers from afar!’ they said, and they turned the hilts of
their swords towards the travellers in token of peace. Green gems
ﬂashed in the sunlight. Then one of the guards stepped forward and
spoke in the Common Speech.
‘I am the Doorward of Théoden,’ he said. ‘Háma is my name.
Here I must bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.’
Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver-hafted knife, his quiver,
and his bow. ‘Keep these well,’ he said, ‘for they come from the
Golden Wood and the Lady of Lothlórien gave them to me.’
Wonder came into the man’s eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily
by the wall, as if he feared to handle them. ‘No man will touch them,
I promise you,’ he said.
Aragorn stood a while hesitating. ‘It is not my will,’ he said, ‘to put
aside my sword or to deliver Andúril to the hand of any other man.’
‘It is the will of Théoden,’ said Háma.
‘It is not clear to me that the will of Théoden son of Thengel,
even though he be lord of the Mark, should prevail over the will of
Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elendil’s heir of Gondor.’
‘This is the house of Théoden, not of Aragorn, even were he King
of Gondor in the seat of Denethor,’ said Háma, stepping swiftly
before the doors and barring the way. His sword was now in his hand
and the point towards the strangers.
‘This is idle talk,’ said Gandalf. ‘Needless is Théoden’s demand,

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

511

but it is useless to refuse. A king will have his way in his own hall,
be it folly or wisdom.’
‘Truly,’ said Aragorn. ‘And I would do as the master of the house
bade me, were this only a woodman’s cot, if I bore now any sword
but Andúril.’
‘Whatever its name may be,’ said Háma, ‘here you shall lay it, if
you would not ﬁght alone against all the men in Edoras.’
‘Not alone!’ said Gimli, ﬁngering the blade of his axe, and looking
darkly up at the guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a
mind to fell. ‘Not alone!’
‘Come, come!’ said Gandalf. ‘We are all friends here. Or should
be; for the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel.
My errand is pressing. Here at least is my sword, goodman Háma.
Keep it well. Glamdring it is called, for the Elves made it long ago.
Now let me pass. Come, Aragorn!’
Slowly Aragorn unbuckled his belt and himself set his sword
upright against the wall. ‘Here I set it,’ he said; ‘but I command you
not to touch it, nor to permit any other to lay hand on it. In this
Elvish sheath dwells the Blade that was Broken and has been made
again. Telchar ﬁrst wrought it in the deeps of time. Death shall come
to any man that draws Elendil’s sword save Elendil’s heir.’
The guard stepped back and looked with amazement on Aragorn.
‘It seems that you are come on the wings of song out of the forgotten
days,’ he said. ‘It shall be, lord, as you command.’
‘Well,’ said Gimli, ‘if it has Andúril to keep it company, my axe
may stay here, too, without shame’; and he laid it on the ﬂoor. ‘Now
then, if all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.’
The guard still hesitated. ‘Your staff,’ he said to Gandalf. ‘Forgive
me, but that too must be left at the doors.’
‘Foolishness!’ said Gandalf. ‘Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is another. I am old. If I may not lean on my stick as I go, then
I will sit out here, until it pleases Théoden to hobble out himself to
speak with me.’
Aragorn laughed. ‘Every man has something too dear to trust to
another. But would you part an old man from his support? Come,
will you not let us enter?’
‘The staff in the hand of a wizard may be more than a prop for
age,’ said Háma. He looked hard at the ash-staff on which Gandalf
leaned. ‘Yet in doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom.
I believe you are friends and folk worthy of honour, who have no
evil purpose. You may go in.’
The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung
them slowly inwards grumbling on their great hinges. The travellers

512

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

entered. Inside it seemed dark and warm after the clear air upon the
hill. The hall was long and wide and ﬁlled with shadows and half
lights; mighty pillars upheld its lofty roof. But here and there bright
sunbeams fell in glimmering shafts from the eastern windows, high
under the deep eaves. Through the louver in the roof, above the thin
wisps of issuing smoke, the sky showed pale and blue. As their eyes
changed, the travellers perceived that the ﬂoor was paved with stones
of many hues; branching runes and strange devices intertwined
beneath their feet. They saw now that the pillars were richly carved,
gleaming dully with gold and half-seen colours. Many woven cloths
were hung upon the walls, and over their wide spaces marched ﬁgures
of ancient legend, some dim with years, some darkling in the shade.
But upon one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse.
He was blowing a great horn, and his yellow hair was ﬂying in the
wind. The horse’s head was lifted, and its nostrils were wide and red
as it neighed, smelling battle afar. Foaming water, green and white,
rushed and curled about its knees.
‘Behold Eorl the Young!’ said Aragorn. ‘Thus he rode out of the
North to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.’
Now the four companions went forward, past the clear wood-ﬁre
burning upon the long hearth in the midst of the hall. Then they
halted. At the far end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing
north towards the doors, was a dais with three steps; and in the
middle of the dais was a great gilded chair. Upon it sat a man so
bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but his white hair was
long and thick and fell in great braids from beneath a thin golden
circlet set upon his brow. In the centre upon his forehead shone a
single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees;
but his eyes still burned with a bright light, glinting as he gazed at
the strangers. Behind his chair stood a woman clad in white. At his
feet upon the steps sat a wizened ﬁgure of a man, with a pale wise
face and heavy-lidded eyes.
There was a silence. The old man did not move in his chair. At
length Gandalf spoke. ‘Hail, Théoden son of Thengel! I have
returned. For behold! the storm comes, and now all friends should
gather together, lest each singly be destroyed.’
Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short
black staff with a handle of white bone; and now the strangers saw
that, bent though he was, he was still tall and must in youth have
been high and proud indeed.
‘I greet you,’ he said, ‘and maybe you look for welcome. But truth
to tell your welcome is doubtful here, Master Gandalf. You have ever
been a herald of woe. Troubles follow you like crows, and ever the

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

513

oftener the worse. I will not deceive you: when I heard that Shadowfax
had come back riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but
´
still more at the lack of the rider; and when Eomer
brought the tidings
that you had gone at last to your long home, I did not mourn. But
news from afar is seldom sooth. Here you come again! And with you
come evils worse than before, as might be expected. Why should I
welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.’ Slowly he sat down
again in his chair.
‘You speak justly, lord,’ said the pale man sitting upon the steps
of the dais. ‘It is not yet ﬁve days since the bitter tidings came that
Théodred your son was slain upon the West Marches: your right´
hand, Second Marshal of the Mark. In Eomer
there is little trust.
Few men would be left to guard your walls, if he had been allowed
to rule. And even now we learn from Gondor that the Dark Lord is
stirring in the East. Such is the hour in which this wanderer chooses
to return. Why indeed should we welcome you, Master Stormcrow?
Láthspell I name you, Ill-news; and ill news is an ill guest they say.’
He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment and gazed
on the strangers with dark eyes.
‘You are held wise, my friend Wormtongue, and are doubtless a
great support to your master,’ answered Gandalf in a soft voice. ‘Yet
in two ways may a man come with evil tidings. He may be a worker
of evil; or he may be such as leaves well alone, and comes only to
bring aid in time of need.’
‘That is so,’ said Wormtongue; ‘but there is a third kind: pickers
of bones, meddlers in other men’s sorrows, carrion-fowl that grow
fat on war. What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what
aid do you bring now? It was aid from us that you sought last time
that you were here. Then my lord bade you choose any horse that
you would and be gone; and to the wonder of all you took Shadowfax
in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to some it seemed
that to speed you from the land the price was not too great. I guess
that it is likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid
rather than render it. Do you bring men? Do you bring horses,
swords, spears? That I would call aid; that is our present need. But
who are these that follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in
grey, and you yourself the most beggar-like of the four!’
‘The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Théoden
son of Thengel,’ said Gandalf. ‘Has not the messenger from your
gate reported the names of my companions? Seldom has any lord of
Rohan received three such guests. Weapons they have laid at your
doors that are worth many a mortal man, even the mightiest. Grey
is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and thus they have passed
through the shadow of great perils to your hall.’

514

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

´
‘Then it is true, as Eomer
reported, that you are in league with
the Sorceress of the Golden Wood?’ said Wormtongue. ‘It is not to
be wondered at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.’
Gimli strode a pace forward, but felt suddenly the hand of Gandalf
clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone.
In Dwimordene, in Lórien
Seldom have walked the feet of Men,
Few mortal eyes have seen the light
That lies there ever, long and bright.
Galadriel! Galadriel!
Clear is the water of your well;
White is the star in your white hand;
Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land
In Dwimordene, in Lórien
More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men.
Thus Gandalf softly sang, and then suddenly he changed. Casting
his tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned no longer on his
staff; and he spoke in a clear cold voice.
‘The wise speak only of what they know, Grı́ma son of Gálmód.
A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and keep your
forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through ﬁre and
death to bandy crooked words with a serving-man till the lightning
falls.’
He raised his staff. There was a roll of thunder. The sunlight was
blotted out from the eastern windows; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night. The ﬁre faded to sullen embers. Only Gandalf
could be seen, standing white and tall before the blackened hearth.
In the gloom they heard the hiss of Wormtongue’s voice: ‘Did I
not counsel you, lord, to forbid his staff ? That fool, Háma, has
betrayed us!’ There was a ﬂash as if lightning had cloven the roof.
Then all was silent. Wormtongue sprawled on his face.
‘Now Théoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?’ said
Gandalf. ‘Do you ask for help?’ He lifted his staff and pointed to a
high window. There the darkness seemed to clear, and through the
opening could be seen, high and far, a patch of shining sky. ‘Not all
is dark. Take courage, Lord of the Mark; for better help you will not
ﬁnd. No counsel have I to give to those that despair. Yet counsel I
could give, and words I could speak to you. Will you hear them?
They are not for all ears. I bid you come out before your doors and
look abroad. Too long have you sat in shadows and trusted to twisted
tales and crooked promptings.’

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

515

Slowly Théoden left his chair. A faint light grew in the hall again.
The woman hastened to the king’s side, taking his arm, and with
faltering steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly
through the hall. Wormtongue remained lying on the ﬂoor. They
came to the doors and Gandalf knocked.
‘Open!’ he cried. ‘The Lord of the Mark comes forth!’
The doors rolled back and a keen air came whistling in. A wind
was blowing on the hill.
‘Send your guards down to the stairs’ foot,’ said Gandalf. ‘And
you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.’
´
‘Go, Eowyn
sister-daughter!’ said the old king. ‘The time for fear
is past.’
The woman turned and went slowly into the house. As she passed
the doors she turned and looked back. Grave and thoughtful was her
glance, as she looked on the king with cool pity in her eyes. Very fair
was her face, and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and
tall she was in her white robe girt with silver; but strong she seemed
and stern as steel, a daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the ﬁrst
´
time in the full light of day beheld Eowyn,
Lady of Rohan, and
thought her fair, fair and cold, like a morning of pale spring that is
not yet come to womanhood. And she now was suddenly aware of
him: tall heir of kings, wise with many winters, greycloaked, hiding
a power that yet she felt. For a moment still as stone she stood, then
turning swiftly she was gone.
‘Now, lord,’ said Gandalf, ‘look out upon your land! Breathe the
free air again!’
From the porch upon the top of the high terrace they could see
beyond the stream the green ﬁelds of Rohan fading into distant grey.
Curtains of wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and
to the west was still dark with thunder, and lightning far away
ﬂickered among the tops of hidden hills. But the wind had shifted
to the north, and already the storm that had come out of the East
was receding, rolling away southward to the sea. Suddenly through
a rent in the clouds behind them a shaft of sun stabbed down. The
falling showers gleamed like silver, and far away the river glittered
like a shimmering glass.
‘It is not so dark here,’ said Théoden.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders
as some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!’
From the king’s hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones.
He drew himself up, slowly, as a man that is stiff from long bending
over some dull toil. Now tall and straight he stood, and his eyes were
blue as he looked into the opening sky.
‘Dark have been my dreams of late,’ he said, ‘but I feel as one

516

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf.
For I fear that already you have come too late, only to see the last
days of my house. Not long now shall stand the high hall which
Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall devour the high seat. What is to
be done?’
´
‘Much,’ said Gandalf. ‘But ﬁrst send for Eomer.
Do I not guess
rightly that you hold him prisoner, by the counsel of Grı́ma, of him
that all save you name the Wormtongue?’
‘It is true,’ said Théoden. ‘He had rebelled against my commands,
and threatened death to Grı́ma in my hall.’
‘A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels,’ said Gandalf.
‘That may be. I will do as you ask. Call Háma to me. Since he
proved untrusty as a doorward, let him become an errand-runner.
The guilty shall bring the guilty to judgement,’ said Théoden, and
his voice was grim, yet he looked at Gandalf and smiled and as he
did so many lines of care were smoothed away and did not return.
When Háma had been summoned and had gone, Gandalf led
Théoden to a stone seat, and then sat himself before the king upon
the topmost stair. Aragorn and his companions stood nearby.
‘There is no time to tell all that you should hear,’ said Gandalf.
‘Yet if my hope is not cheated, a time will come ere long when I can
speak more fully. Behold! you are come into a peril greater even than
the wit of Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see! you
dream no longer. You live. Gondor and Rohan do not stand alone.
The enemy is strong beyond our reckoning, yet we have a hope at
which he has not guessed.’
Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice was low and secret, and
none save the king heard what he said. But ever as he spoke the light
shone brighter in Théoden’s eye, and at the last he rose from his seat
to his full height, and Gandalf beside him, and together they looked
out from the high place towards the East.
‘Verily,’ said Gandalf, now in a loud voice, keen and clear, ‘that
way lies our hope, where sits our greatest fear. Doom hangs still on
a thread. Yet hope there is still, if we can but stand unconquered for
a little while.’
The others too now turned their eyes eastward. Over the sundering
leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope
and fear bore their thoughts still on, beyond dark mountains to the
Land of Shadow. Where now was the Ring-bearer? How thin indeed
was the thread upon which doom still hung! It seemed to Legolas,
as he strained his farseeing eyes, that he caught a glint of white: far
away perchance the sun twinkled on a pinnacle of the Tower of

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

517

Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet a present threat,
there was a tiny tongue of ﬂame.
Slowly Théoden sat down again, as if weariness still struggled to
master him against the will of Gandalf. He turned and looked at his
great house. ‘Alas!’ he said, ‘that these evil days should be mine, and
should come in my old age instead of that peace which I have earned.
Alas for Boromir the brave! The young perish and the old linger,
withering.’ He clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands.
‘Your ﬁngers would remember their old strength better, if they
grasped a sword-hilt,’ said Gandalf.
Théoden rose and put his hand to his side; but no sword hung at
his belt. ‘Where has Grı́ma stowed it?’ he muttered under his breath.
‘Take this, dear lord!’ said a clear voice. ‘It was ever at your
service.’ Two men had come softly up the stair and stood now a few
´
steps from the top. Eomer
was there. No helm was on his head, no
mail was on his breast, but in his hand he held a drawn sword; and
as he knelt he offered the hilt to his master.
‘How comes this?’ said Théoden sternly. He turned towards
´
Eomer,
and the men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud
and erect. Where was the old man whom they had left crouching in
his chair or leaning on his stick?
‘It is my doing, lord,’ said Háma, trembling. ‘I understood that
Éomer was to be set free. Such joy was in my heart that maybe I
have erred. Yet, since he was free again, and he a Marshal of the
Mark, I brought him his sword as he bade me.’
´
‘To lay at your feet, my lord,’ said Eomer.
´
For a moment of silence Théoden stood looking down at Eomer
as he knelt still before him. Neither moved.
‘Will you not take the sword?’ said Gandalf.
Slowly Théoden stretched forth his hand. As his ﬁngers took the
hilt, it seemed to the watchers that ﬁrmness and strength returned
to his thin arm. Suddenly he lifted the blade and swung it shimmering
and whistling in the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang
clear as he chanted in the tongue of Rohan a call to arms.
Arise now, arise, Riders of Théoden!
Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward.
Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded!
Forth Eorlingas!
The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the
stair. They looked at their lord in amazement, and then as one man
they drew their swords and laid them at his feet. ‘Command us!’ they
said.

518

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

´
‘Westu Théoden hál!’ cried Eomer.
‘It is a joy to us to see you
return into your own. Never again shall it be said, Gandalf, that you
come only with grief !’
´
‘Take back your sword, Eomer,
sister-son!’ said the king. ‘Go,
Háma, and seek my own sword! Grı́ma has it in his keeping. Bring
him to me also. Now, Gandalf, you said that you had counsel to
give, if I would hear it. What is your counsel?’
‘You have yourself already taken it,’ answered Gandalf. ‘To put
´
your trust in Eomer,
rather than in a man of crooked mind. To cast
aside regret and fear. To do the deed at hand. Every man that can
´
ride should be sent west at once, as Eomer
counselled you: we must
ﬁrst destroy the threat of Saruman, while we have time. If we fail,
we fall. If we succeed – then we will face the next task. Meanwhile
your people that are left, the women and the children and the old,
should ﬂy to the refuges that you have in the mountains. Were they
not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let them take
provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves with treasures, great
or small. It is their lives that are at stake.’
‘This counsel seems good to me now,’ said Théoden. ‘Let all my
folk get ready! But you my guests – truly you said, Gandalf, that the
courtesy of my hall is lessened. You have ridden through the night,
and the morning wears away. You have had neither sleep nor food.
A guest-house shall be made ready: there you shall sleep, when you
have eaten.’
‘Nay, lord,’ said Aragorn. ‘There is no rest yet for the weary. The
men of Rohan must ride forth today, and we will ride with them,
axe, sword, and bow. We did not bring them to rest against your
´
wall, Lord of the Mark. And I promised Eomer
that my sword and
his should be drawn together.’
´
‘Now indeed there is hope of victory!’ said Eomer.
‘Hope, yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘But Isengard is strong. And other perils
draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Théoden, when we are gone. Lead
your people swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!’
‘Nay, Gandalf !’ said the king. ‘You do not know your own skill
in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall in the
front of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.’
‘Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,’ said
Aragorn. The armed men that stood near clashed their weapons,
crying: ‘The Lord of the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!’
‘But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless,’
said Gandalf. ‘Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?’
‘I will take thought for that ere I go,’ answered Théoden. ‘Here
comes my counsellor.’
*
*
*

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

519

At that moment Háma came again from the hall. Behind him
cringing between two other men, came Grı́ma the Wormtongue. His
face was very white. His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Háma knelt
and presented to Théoden a long sword in a scabbard clasped with
gold and set with green gems.
‘Here, lord, is Herugrim, your ancient blade,’ he said. ‘It was
found in his chest. Loth was he to render up the keys. Many other
things are there which men have missed.’
‘You lie,’ said Wormtongue. ‘And this sword your master himself
gave into my keeping.’
‘And he now requires it of you again,’ said Théoden. ‘Does that
displease you?’
‘Assuredly not, lord,’ said Wormtongue. ‘I care for you and yours
as best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your
strength. Let others deal with these irksome guests. Your meat is
about to be set on the board. Will you not go to it?’
‘I will,’ said Théoden. ‘And let food for my guests be set on the
board beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let
them summon all who dwell nigh! Every man and strong lad able to
bear arms, all who have horses, let them be ready in the saddle at
the gate ere the second hour from noon!’
‘Dear lord!’ cried Wormtongue. ‘It is as I feared. This wizard has
bewitched you. Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of
your fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the
Mark?’
‘If this is bewitchment,’ said Théoden, ‘it seems to me more wholesome than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have
had me walking on all fours like a beast. No, not one shall be left,
not even Grı́ma. Grı́ma shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean
the rust from your sword.’
‘Mercy, lord!’ whined Wormtongue, grovelling on the ground.
‘Have pity on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your
side! I at least will stand by you when all others have gone. Do not
send your faithful Grı́ma away!’
‘You have my pity,’ said Théoden. ‘And I do not send you from
my side. I go myself to war with my men. I bid you come with me
and prove your faith.’
Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted
look of a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He licked
his lips with a long pale tongue. ‘Such a resolve might be expected
from a lord of the House of Eorl, old though he be,’ he said. ‘But
those who truly love him would spare his failing years. Yet I see that
I come too late. Others, whom the death of my lord would perhaps
grieve less, have already persuaded him. If I cannot undo their

520

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

work, hear me at least in this, lord! One who knows your mind and
honours your commands should be left in Edoras. Appoint a faithful
steward. Let your counsellor Grı́ma keep all things till your return –
and I pray that we may see it, though no wise man will deem it
hopeful.’
´
Eomer
laughed. ‘And if that plea does not excuse you from war,
most noble Wormtongue,’ he said, ‘what ofﬁce of less honour would
you accept? To carry a sack of meal up into the mountains – if any
man would trust you with it?’
´
‘Nay, Eomer,
you do not fully understand the mind of Master
Wormtongue,’ said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him.
‘He is bold and cunning. Even now he plays a game with peril and
wins a throw. Hours of my precious time he has wasted already.
Down, snake!’ he said suddenly in a terrible voice. ‘Down on your
belly! How long is it since Saruman bought you? What was the
promised price? When all the men were dead, you were to pick your
share of the treasure, and take the woman you desire? Too long have
you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.’
´
Eomer
grasped his sword. ‘That I knew already,’ he muttered.
‘For that reason I would have slain him before, forgetting the law of
the hall. But there are other reasons.’ He stepped forward, but
Gandalf stayed him with his hand.
´
‘Eowyn
is safe now,’ he said. ‘But you, Wormtongue, you have
done what you could for your true master. Some reward you have
earned at least. Yet Saruman is apt to overlook his bargains. I should
advise you to go quickly and remind him, lest he forget your faithful
service.’
‘You lie,’ said Wormtongue.
‘That word comes too oft and easy from your lips,’ said Gandalf.
‘I do not lie. See, Théoden, here is a snake! With safety you cannot
take it with you, nor can you leave it behind. To slay it would be
just. But it was not always as it now is. Once it was a man, and did
you service in its fashion. Give him a horse and let him go at once,
wherever he chooses. By his choice you shall judge him.’
‘Do you hear this, Wormtongue?’ said Théoden. ‘This is your
choice: to ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you
are true; or to go now, whither you will. But then, if ever we meet
again, I shall not be merciful.’
Slowly Wormtongue rose. He looked at them with half-closed eyes.
Last of all he scanned Théoden’s face and opened his mouth as if to
speak. Then suddenly he drew himself up. His hands worked. His
eyes glittered. Such malice was in them that men stepped back from
him. He bared his teeth; and then with a hissing breath he spat before
the king’s feet, and darting to one side, he ﬂed down the stair.

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

521

‘After him!’ said Théoden. ‘See that he does no harm to any, but
do not hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.’
´
‘And if any will bear him,’ said Eomer.
One of the guards ran down the stair. Another went to the well
at the foot of the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he
washed clean the stones that Wormtongue had deﬁled.
‘Now my guests, come!’ said Théoden. ‘Come and take such
refreshment as haste allows.’
They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below
them in the town the heralds crying and the war-horns blowing. For
the king was to ride forth as soon as the men of the town and those
dwelling near could be armed and assembled.
´
At the king’s board sat Eomer
and the four guests, and there also
´
waiting upon the king was the lady Eowyn.
They ate and drank
swiftly. The others were silent while Théoden questioned Gandalf
concerning Saruman.
‘How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?’ said Gandalf.
‘He was not always evil. Once I do not doubt that he was the friend
of Rohan; and even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful
still. But for long now he has plotted your ruin, wearing the mask of
friendship, until he was ready. In those years Wormtongue’s task was
easy, and all that you did was swiftly known in Isengard; for your land
was open, and strangers came and went. And ever Wormtongue’s
whispering was in your ears, poisoning your thought, chilling your
heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and could do
nothing, for your will was in his keeping.
‘But when I escaped and warned you, then the mask was torn, for
those who would see. After that Wormtongue played dangerously,
always seeking to delay you, to prevent your full strength being gathered. He was crafty: dulling men’s wariness, or working on their fears,
as served the occasion. Do you not remember how eagerly he urged
that no man should be spared on a wildgoose chase northward, when
´
the immediate peril was westward? He persuaded you to forbid Eomer
´
to pursue the raiding Orcs. If Eomer
had not deﬁed Wormtongue’s
voice speaking with your mouth, those Orcs would have reached
Isengard by now, bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which
Saruman desires above all else, but at the least two members of my
Company, sharers of a secret hope, of which even to you, lord, I
cannot yet speak openly. Dare you think of what they might now be
suffering, or what Saruman might now have learned to our
destruction?’
´
‘I owe much to Eomer,’
said Théoden. ‘Faithful heart may have
froward tongue.’

522

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Say also,’ said Gandalf, ‘that to crooked eyes truth may wear a
wry face.’
‘Indeed my eyes were almost blind,’ said Théoden. ‘Most of all I
owe to you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would
give you a gift ere we go, at your own choosing. You have only to
name aught that is mine. I reserve now only my sword!’
‘Whether I came in time or not is yet to be seen,’ said Gandalf.
‘But as for your gift, lord, I will choose one that will ﬁt my need:
swift and sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was only lent before, if loan
we may call it. But now I shall ride him into great hazard, setting
silver against black: I would not risk anything that is not my own.
And already there is a bond of love between us.’
‘You choose well,’ said Théoden; ‘and I give him now gladly. Yet
it is a great gift. There is none like to Shadowfax. In him one of the
mighty steeds of old has returned. None such shall return again. And
to you my other guests I will offer such things as may be found in
my armoury. Swords you do not need, but there are helms and coats
of mail of cunning work, gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose
from these ere we go, and may they serve you well!’
Now men came bearing raiment of war from the king’s hoard, and
they arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they
chose, and round shields: their bosses were overlaid with gold and
set with gems, green and red and white. Gandalf took no armour;
and Gimli needed no coat of rings, even if one had been found to
match his stature, for there was no hauberk in the hoards of Edoras
of better make than his short corslet forged beneath the Mountain
in the North. But he chose a cap of iron and leather that ﬁtted well
upon his round head; and a small shield he also took. It bore the
running horse, white upon green, that was the emblem of the House
of Eorl.
‘May it keep you well!’ said Théoden. ‘It was made for me in
Thengel’s day, while still I was a boy.’
Gimli bowed. ‘I am proud, Lord of the Mark, to bear your device,’
he said. ‘Indeed sooner would I bear a horse than be borne by one.
I love my feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand
and ﬁght.’
‘It may well be so,’ said Théoden.
´
The king now rose, and at once Eowyn
came forward bearing
wine. ‘Ferthu Théoden hál!’ she said. ‘Receive now this cup and drink
in happy hour. Health be with thee at thy going and coming!’
Théoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the
guests. As she stood before Aragorn she paused suddenly and looked
upon him, and her eyes were shining. And he looked down upon her

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

523

fair face and smiled; but as he took the cup, his hand met hers, and
he knew that she trembled at the touch. ‘Hail Aragorn son of
Arathorn!’ she said. ‘Hail Lady of Rohan!’ he answered, but his face
now was troubled and he did not smile.
When they had all drunk, the king went down the hall to the doors.
There the guards awaited him, and heralds stood, and all the lords
and chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt
nearby.
‘Behold! I go forth, and it seems like to be my last riding,’ said
´
Théoden. ‘I have no child. Théodred my son is slain. I name Eomer
my sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a
new lord as you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people
that I leave behind, to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?’
No man spoke.
‘Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people
trust?’
‘In the House of Eorl,’ answered Háma.
´
‘But Eomer
I cannot spare, nor would he stay,’ said the king; ‘and
he is the last of that House.’
´
‘I said not Eomer,’
answered Háma. ‘And he is not the last. There
´
´
is Eowyn, daughter of Eomund,
his sister. She is fearless and highhearted. All love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we
are gone.’
‘It shall be so,’ said Théoden. ‘Let the heralds announce to the
´
folk that the Lady Eowyn
will lead them!’
´
Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and Eowyn
knelt
before him and received from him a sword and a fair corslet. ‘Farewell
sister-daughter!’ he said. ‘Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall return
to the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend
themselves, and if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.’
‘Speak not so!’ she answered. ‘A year shall I endure for every day
that passes until your return.’ But as she spoke her eyes went to
Aragorn who stood nearby.
‘The king shall come again,’ he said. ‘Fear not! Not West but East
does our doom await us.’
The king now went down the stair with Gandalf beside him. The
others followed. Aragorn looked back as they passed towards the
´
gate. Alone Eowyn
stood before the doors of the house at the stair’s
head; the sword was set upright before her, and her hands were laid
upon the hilt. She was clad now in mail and shone like silver in the
sun.
Gimli walked with Legolas, his axe on his shoulder. ‘Well, at last
we set off !’ he said. ‘Men need many words before deeds. My axe is

524

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

restless in my hands. Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are
fell-handed when they come to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare
that suits me. How shall I come to the battle? I wish I could walk
and not bump like a sack at Gandalf ’s saddlebow.’
‘A safer seat than many, I guess,’ said Legolas. ‘Yet doubtless
Gandalf will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin; or
Shadowfax himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.’
‘And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not
shave the scalps of Men,’ said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe.
At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all
ready in the saddle. More than a thousand were there mustered.
Their spears were like a springing wood. Loudly and joyously they
shouted as Théoden came forth. Some held in readiness the king’s
horse, Snowmane, and others held the horses of Aragorn and Legolas.
´
Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, but Eomer
came up to him, leading
his horse.
‘Hail, Gimli Glóin’s son!’ he cried. ‘I have not had time to learn
gentle speech under your rod, as you promised. But shall we not put
aside our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of
the Wood.’
´
´
‘I will forget my wrath for a while, Eomer
son of Eomund,’
said
Gimli; ‘but if ever you chance to see the Lady Galadriel with your
eyes, then you shall acknowledge her the fairest of ladies, or our
friendship will end.’
´
‘So be it!’ said Eomer.
‘But until that time pardon me, and in
token of pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with
the Lord of the Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if
you will.’
‘I thank you indeed,’ said Gimli greatly pleased. ‘I will gladly go
with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.’
´
‘It shall be so,’ said Eomer.
‘Legolas upon my left, and Aragorn
upon my right, and none will dare to stand before us!’
‘Where is Shadowfax?’ said Gandalf.
‘Running wild over the grass,’ they answered. ‘He will let no man
handle him. There he goes, away down by the ford, like a shadow
among the willows.’
Gandalf whistled and called aloud the horse’s name, and far away
he tossed his head and neighed, and turning sped towards the host
like an arrow.
‘Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even
´
so would it appear,’ said Eomer,
as the great horse ran up, until he
stood before the wizard.
‘The gift seems already to be given,’ said Théoden. ‘But hearken
all! Here now I name my guest, Gandalf Greyhame, wisest of counsel-

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

525

lors, most welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of
the Eorlingas while our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax,
prince of horses.’
‘I thank you, Théoden King,’ said Gandalf. Then suddenly he
threw back his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to
horseback. He wore no helm nor mail. His snowy hair ﬂew free in
the wind, his white robes shone dazzling in the sun.
‘Behold the White Rider!’ cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.
‘Our King and the White Rider!’ they shouted. ‘Forth Eorlingas!’
The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed. Spear
clashed on shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush
like the sudden onset of a great wind the last host of Rohan rode
thundering into the West.
´
Far over the plain Eowyn
saw the glitter of their spears, as she
stood still, alone before the doors of the silent house.

Chapter 7
HELM’S DEEP
The sun was already westering as they rode from Edoras, and the
light of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling ﬁelds of Rohan to
a golden haze. There was a beaten way, north-westward along the
foot-hills of the White Mountains, and this they followed, up and
down in a green country, crossing small swift streams by many fords.
Far ahead and to their right the Misty Mountains loomed; ever darker
and taller they grew as the miles went by. The sun went slowly down
before them. Evening came behind.
The host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late,
they rode with all the speed they could, pausing seldom. Swift and
enduring were the steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to
go. Forty leagues and more it was, as a bird ﬂies, from Edoras to the
fords of the Isen, where they hoped to ﬁnd the king’s men that held
back the hosts of Saruman.
Night closed about them. At last they halted to make their camp.
They had ridden for some ﬁve hours and were far out upon the
western plain, yet more than half their journey lay still before
them. In a great circle, under the starry sky and the waxing moon,
they now made their bivouac. They lit no ﬁres, for they were uncertain of events; but they set a ring of mounted guards about
them, and scouts rode out far ahead, passing like shadows in the
folds of the land. The slow night passed without tidings or alarm.
At dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road
again.
There were no clouds overhead yet, but a heaviness was in the
air; it was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was hazy,
and behind it, following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing
darkness, as of a great storm moving out of the East. And away in
the North-west there seemed to be another darkness brooding about
the feet of the Misty Mountains, a shadow that crept down slowly
from the Wizard’s Vale.
´
Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Eomer.
‘You
have the keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas,’ he said; ‘and they
can tell a sparrow from a ﬁnch a league off. Tell me, can you see
anything away yonder towards Isengard?’
‘Many miles lie between,’ said Legolas, gazing thither and shading
his eyes with his long hand. ‘I can see a darkness. There are shapes

HELM’S DEEP

527

moving in it, great shapes far away upon the bank of the river; but
what they are I cannot tell. It is not mist or cloud that defeats my
eyes: there is a veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land,
and it marches slowly down stream. It is as if the twilight under
endless trees were ﬂowing downwards from the hills.’
‘And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,’ said Gandalf. ‘It
will be a black night.’
As the second day of their riding drew on, the heaviness in the air
increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them:
a sombre canopy with great billowing edges ﬂecked with dazzling
light. The sun went down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears
of the Riders were tipped with ﬁre as the last shafts of light kindled
the steep faces of the peaks of Thrihyrne: now very near they stood
on the northernmost arm of the White Mountains, three jagged horns
staring at the sunset. In the last red glow men in the vanguard saw
a black speck, a horseman riding back towards them. They halted
awaiting him.
He came, a weary man with dinted helm and cloven shield. Slowly
he climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At length
´
he spoke. ‘Is Eomer
here?’ he asked. ‘You come at last, but too late,
and with too little strength. Things have gone evilly since Théodred
fell. We were driven back yesterday over the Isen with great loss;
many perished at the crossing. Then at night fresh forces came over
the river against our camp. All Isengard must be emptied; and
Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and herd-folk of Dunland
beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We were overmastered. The shield-wall was broken. Erkenbrand of Westfold has
drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm’s
Deep. The rest are scattered.
´
‘Where is Eomer?
Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should
return to Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there.’
Théoden had sat silent, hidden from the man’s sight behind his
guards; now he urged his horse forward. ‘Come, stand before me,
Ceorl!’ he said. ‘I am here. The last host of the Eorlingas has ridden
forth. It will not return without battle.’
The man’s face lightened with joy and wonder. He drew himself
up. Then he knelt, offering his notched sword to the king. ‘Command
me, lord!’ he cried. ‘And pardon me! I thought——’
‘You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under
winter snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has
shaken the boughs,’ said Théoden. ‘Give this man a fresh horse! Let
us ride to the help of Erkenbrand!’
*
*
*

528

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

While Théoden was speaking, Gandalf rode a short way ahead,
and he sat there alone, gazing north to Isengard and west to the
setting sun. Now he came back.
‘Ride, Théoden!’ he said. ‘Ride to Helm’s Deep! Go not to the
Fords of Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a
while. Shadowfax must bear me now on a swift errand.’ Turning to
´
Aragorn and Eomer
and the men of the king’s household, he cried:
‘Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till I return. Await me at Helm’s
Gate! Farewell!’
He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow from the bow
the great horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a
ﬂash of silver in the sunset, a wind over the grass, a shadow that ﬂed
and passed from sight. Snowmane snorted and reared, eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the wing could have overtaken him.
‘What does that mean?’ said one of the guard to Háma.
‘That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,’ answered Háma.
‘Ever he goes and comes unlooked-for.’
‘Wormtongue, were he here, would not ﬁnd it hard to explain,’
said the other.
‘True enough,’ said Háma; ‘but for myself, I will wait until I see
Gandalf again.’
‘Maybe you will wait long,’ said the other.
The host turned away now from the road to the Fords of Isen and
bent their course southward. Night fell, and still they rode on. The
hills drew near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim
against the darkening sky. Still some miles away, on the far side of
the Westfold Vale, a great bay in the mountains, lay a green coomb,
out of which a gorge opened in the hills. Men of that land called it
Helm’s Deep, after a hero of old wars who had made his refuge there.
Ever steeper and narrower it wound inward from the north under
the shadow of the Thrihyrne, till the crowhaunted cliffs rose like
mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light.
At Helm’s Gate, before the mouth of the Deep, there was a heel
of rock thrust outward by the northern cliff. There upon its spur
stood high walls of ancient stone, and within them was a lofty tower.
Men said that in the far-off days of the glory of Gondor the sea-kings
had built here this fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg
it was called, for a trumpet sounded upon the tower echoed in the
Deep behind, as if armies long-forgotten were issuing to war from
caves beneath the hills. A wall, too, the men of old had made from
the Hornburg to the southern cliff, barring the entrance to the gorge.
Beneath it by a wide culvert the Deeping-stream passed out. About

HELM’S DEEP

529

the feet of the Hornrock it wound, and ﬂowed then in a gully through
the midst of a wide green gore, sloping gently down from Helm’s
Gate to Helm’s Dike. Thence it fell into the Deeping-coomb and
out into the Westfold Vale. There in the Hornburg at Helm’s Gate
Erkenbrand, master of Westfold on the borders of the Mark, now
dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being wise, he had
repaired the wall and made the fastness strong.
The Riders were still in the low valley before the mouth of the
Coomb, when cries and hornblasts were heard from their scouts that
went in front. Out of the darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout
rode back and reported that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley,
and that a host of Orcs and wild men were hurrying southward from
the Fords of Isen and seemed to be making for Helm’s Deep.
‘We have found many of our folk lying slain as they ﬂed thither,’
said the scout. ‘And we have met scattered companies, going this
way and that, leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand none seem
to know. It is likely that he will be overtaken ere he can reach Helm’s
Gate, if he has not already perished.’
‘Has aught been seen of Gandalf ?’ asked Théoden.
‘Yes, lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a horse,
passing hither and thither over the plains like wind in the grass. Some
thought he was Saruman. It is said that he went away ere nightfall
towards Isengard. Some say also that Wormtongue was seen earlier,
going northward with a company of Orcs.’
‘It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him,’ said
Théoden. ‘Nonetheless I miss now both my counsellors, the old and
the new. But in this need we have no better choice than to go on,
as Gandalf said, to Helm’s Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or
no. Is it known how great is the host that comes from the North?’
‘It is very great,’ said the scout. ‘He that ﬂies counts every foeman
twice, yet I have spoken to stouthearted men, and I do not doubt
that the main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that
we have here.’
´
‘Then let us be swift,’ said Eomer.
‘Let us drive through such foes
as are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in Helm’s
Deep where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up
on to the hills.’
‘Trust not to secret ways,’ said the king. ‘Saruman has long spied
out this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us
go!’
´
Aragorn and Legolas went now with Eomer
in the van. On through
the dark night they rode, ever slower as the darkness deepened and

HELM’S DEEP

539

‘They have a blasting ﬁre, and with it they took the Wall. If they
cannot come in the caves, they may seal up those that are inside. But
now we must turn all our thought to our own defence.’
‘I fret in this prison,’ said Théoden. ‘If I could have set a spear in
rest, riding before my men upon the ﬁeld, maybe I could have felt
again the joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.’
‘Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the
Mark,’ said Aragorn. ‘More hope we have to defend you in the
Hornburg than in Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.’
‘It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault,’ said
Théoden; ‘but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and
all that once was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower
withstand such numbers and such reckless hate? Had I known that
the strength of Isengard was grown so great, maybe I should not so
rashly have ridden forth to meet it, for all the arts of Gandalf. His
counsel seems not now so good as it did under the morning sun.’
‘Do not judge the counsel of Gandalf, until all is over, lord,’ said
Aragorn.
‘The end will not be long,’ said the king. ‘But I will not end here,
taken like an old badger in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel and the
horses of my guard are in the inner court. When dawn comes, I will
bid men sound Helm’s horn, and I will ride forth. Will you ride with
me then, son of Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make
such an end as will be worth a song – if any be left to sing of us
hereafter.’
‘I will ride with you,’ said Aragorn.
Taking his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all
their circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the
assault was hot. Legolas went with him. Blasts of ﬁre leaped up from
below shaking the stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders
raised. Again and again the Orcs gained the summit of the outer wall,
and again the defenders cast them down.
At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless of the darts
of the enemy. As he looked forth he saw the eastern sky grow pale.
Then he raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley.
The Orcs yelled and jeered. ‘Come down! Come down!’ they cried.
‘If you wish to speak to us, come down! Bring out your king! We are
the ﬁghting Uruk-hai. We will fetch him from his hole, if he does
not come. Bring out your skulking king!’
‘The king stays or comes at his own will,’ said Aragorn.
‘Then what are you doing here?’ they answered. ‘Why do you look
out? Do you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the ﬁghting
Uruk-hai.’

540

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I looked out to see the dawn,’ said Aragorn.
‘What of the dawn?’ they jeered. ‘We are the Uruk-hai: we do not
stop the ﬁght for night or day, for fair weather or for storm. We come
to kill, by sun or moon. What of the dawn?’
‘None knows what the new day shall bring him,’ said Aragorn.
‘Get you gone, ere it turn to your evil.’
‘Get down or we will shoot you from the wall,’ they cried. ‘This
is no parley. You have nothing to say.’
‘I have still this to say,’ answered Aragorn. ‘No enemy has yet
taken the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not
one will be left alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not
know your peril.’
So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood
there alone above the ruined gates before the host of his enemies, that
many of the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to
the valley, and some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Orcs
laughed with loud voices; and a hail of darts and arrows whistled
over the wall, as Aragorn leaped down.
There was a roar and a blast of ﬁre. The archway of the gate above
which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed in smoke
and dust. The barricade was scattered as if by a thunderbolt. Aragorn
ran to the king’s tower.
But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs about it yelled, preparing
to charge, a murmur arose behind them, like a wind in the distance,
and it grew to a clamour of many voices crying strange news in the
dawn. The Orcs upon the Rock, hearing the rumour of dismay,
wavered and looked back. And then, sudden and terrible, from the
tower above, the sound of the great horn of Helm rang out.
All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Orcs cast themselves on their faces and covered their ears with their claws. Back
from the Deep the echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff
and hill a mighty herald stood. But on the walls men looked up,
listening with wonder; for the echoes did not die. Ever the hornblasts
wound on among the hills; nearer now and louder they answered
one to another, blowing ﬁerce and free.
‘Helm! Helm!’ the Riders shouted. ‘Helm is arisen and comes
back to war. Helm for Théoden King!’
And with that shout the king came. His horse was white as snow,
golden was his shield, and his spear was long. At his right hand was
Aragorn, Elendil’s heir, behind him rode the lords of the House of
Eorl the Young. Light sprang in the sky. Night departed.
‘Forth Eorlingas!’ With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down
from the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they

HELM’S DEEP

541

drove through the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind
them from the Deep came the stern cries of men issuing from the
caves, driving forth the enemy. Out poured all the men that were left
upon the Rock. And ever the sound of blowing horns echoed in the
hills.
On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains and champions fell or ﬂed before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them.
Their backs were to the swords and spears of the Riders, and their
faces to the valley. They cried and wailed, for fear and great wonder
had come upon them with the rising of the day.
So King Théoden rode from Helm’s Gate and clove his path to
the great Dike. There the company halted. Light grew bright about
them. Shafts of the sun ﬂared above the eastern hills and glimmered
on their spears. But they sat silent on their horses, and they gazed
down upon the Deeping-coomb.
The land had changed. Where before the green dale had lain, its
grassy slopes lapping the ever-mounting hills, there now a forest
loomed. Great trees, bare and silent, stood, rank on rank, with tangled
bough and hoary head; their twisted roots were buried in the long
green grass. Darkness was under them. Between the Dike and the
eaves of that nameless wood only two open furlongs lay. There now
cowered the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror of the king and in
terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm’s Gate until all
above the Dike was empty of them, but below it they were packed
like swarming ﬂies. Vainly they crawled and clambered about the
walls of the coomb, seeking to escape. Upon the east too sheer and
stony was the valley’s side; upon the left, from the west, their ﬁnal
doom approached.
There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white,
shining in the rising sun. Over the low hills the horns were sounding.
Behind him, hastening down the long slopes, were a thousand men
on foot; their swords were in their hands. Amid them strode a man
tall and strong. His shield was red. As he came to the valley’s brink,
he set to his lips a great black horn and blew a ringing blast.
‘Erkenbrand!’ the Riders shouted. ‘Erkenbrand!’
‘Behold the White Rider!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Gandalf is come again!’
‘Mithrandir, Mithrandir!’ said Legolas. ‘This is wizardry indeed!
Come! I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.’
The hosts of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning
from fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down
through the breach of the Dike charged the king’s company. Down
from the hills leaped Erkenbrand, lord of Westfold. Down leaped

542

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Shadowfax, like a deer that runs surefooted in the mountains. The
White Rider was upon them, and the terror of his coming ﬁlled the
enemy with madness. The wild men fell on their faces before him.
The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and spear.
Like a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they ﬂed. Wailing
they passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that
shadow none ever came again.

Chapter 8
THE ROAD TO ISENGARD
So it was that in the light of a fair morning King Théoden and
Gandalf the White Rider met again upon the green grass beside the
Deeping-stream. There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and
Legolas the Elf, and Erkenbrand of Westfold, and the lords of the
Golden House. About them were gathered the Rohirrim, the Riders
of the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and their eyes
were turned towards the wood.
Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came
those who had been driven back into the Deep. There came Gamling
´
´
the Old, and Eomer
son of Eomund,
and beside them walked Gimli
the dwarf. He had no helm, and about his head was a linen band
stained with blood; but his voice was loud and strong.
‘Forty-two, Master Legolas!’ he cried. ‘Alas! My axe is notched:
the forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?’
‘You have passed my score by one,’ answered Legolas. ‘But I do
not grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!’
´
‘Welcome, Eomer,
sister-son!’ said Théoden. ‘Now that I see you
safe, I am glad indeed.’
´
‘Hail, Lord of the Mark!’ said Eomer.
‘The dark night has passed,
and day has come again. But the day has brought strange tidings.’
He turned and gazed in wonder, ﬁrst at the wood and then at Gandalf.
‘Once more you come in the hour of need, unlooked-for,’ he said.
‘Unlooked-for?’ said Gandalf. ‘I said that I would return and meet
you here.’
‘But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your
coming. Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf
the White!’
‘That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given
good counsel in peril, and made use of the speed of Shadowfax. Your
own valour has done more, and the stout legs of the Westfold-men
marching through the night.’
Then they all gazed at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some
glanced darkly at the wood, and passed their hands over their brows,
as if they thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.
Gandalf laughed long and merrily. ‘The trees?’ he said. ‘Nay, I
see the wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is
a thing beyond the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and
better even than my hope the event has proved.’

544

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry?’ said Théoden. ‘Not
Saruman’s, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we
have yet to learn?’
‘It is not wizardry, but a power far older,’ said Gandalf: ‘a power
that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang.
Ere iron was found or tree was hewn,
When young was mountain under moon;
Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe,
It walked the forests long ago.’
‘And what may be the answer to your riddle?’ said Théoden.
‘If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard,’
answered Gandalf.
‘To Isengard?’ they cried.
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I shall return to Isengard, and those who will
may come with me. There we may see strange things.’
‘But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all
gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault
the stronghold of Saruman,’ said Théoden.
‘Nevertheless to Isengard I go,’ said Gandalf. ‘I shall not stay there
long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the
waning of the moon!’
‘Nay!’ said Théoden. ‘In the dark hour before dawn I doubted,
but we will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.’
‘I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now,’ said
Gandalf, ‘and since he has done you great injury, it would be ﬁtting
if you were there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?’
‘My men are weary with battle,’ said the King; ‘and I am weary
also. For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My old age is not
feigned nor due only to the whisperings of Wormtongue. It is an ill
that no leech can wholly cure, not even Gandalf.’
‘Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,’ said Gandalf. ‘We
will journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is my
counsel that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may
be, henceforth. But do not command many men to go with you,
Théoden. We go to a parley not to a ﬁght.’
The King then chose men that were unhurt and had swift horses,
and he sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of
the Mark; and they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young
and old, to come in haste to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark
would hold an assembly of all that could bear arms, on the third day
after the full moon. To ride with him to Isengard the King chose
´
Eomer
and twenty men of his household. With Gandalf would go

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

545

Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite of his hurt the dwarf would
not stay behind.
‘It was only a feeble blow and the cap turned it,’ he said. ‘It would
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.’
‘I will tend it, while you rest,’ said Aragorn.
The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep
of quiet as he had not known for many years, and the remainder of
his chosen company rested also. But the others, all that were not
hurt or wounded, began a great labour; for many had fallen in the
battle and lay dead upon the ﬁeld or in the Deep.
No Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But a great
many of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid,
and cried for mercy.
The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set
them to work.
‘Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined,’ said Erkenbrand; ‘and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass the
Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march with the enemies of Men; and
then you shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded
by Saruman. Many of you have got death as the reward of your trust
in him; but had you conquered, little better would your wages have
been.’
The men of Dunland were amazed; for Saruman had told them
that the men of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive.
In the midst of the ﬁeld before the Hornburg two mounds were
raised, and beneath them were laid all the Riders of the Mark who
fell in the defence, those of the East Dales upon one side, and those
of Westfold upon the other. But the men of Dunland were set apart
in a mound below the Dike. In a grave alone under the shadow of
the Hornburg lay Háma, captain of the King’s guard. He fell before
the Gate.
The Orcs were piled in great heaps, away from the mounds of
Men, not far from the eaves of the forest. And the people were
troubled in their minds; for the heaps of carrion were too great for
burial or for burning. They had little wood for ﬁring, and none would
have dared to take an axe to the strange trees, even if Gandalf had
not warned them to hurt neither bark nor bough at their great peril.
‘Let the Orcs lie,’ said Gandalf. ‘The morning may bring new
counsel.’
In the afternoon the King’s company prepared to depart. The
work of burial was then but beginning; and Théoden mourned for
the loss of Háma, his captain, and cast the ﬁrst earth upon his grave.

546

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Great injury indeed has Saruman done to me and all this land,’ he
said; ‘and I will remember it, when we meet.’
The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west of the
Coomb, when at last Théoden and Gandalf and their companions
rode down from the Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host,
both of the Riders and of the people of Westfold, old and young,
women and children, who had come out from the caves. A song of
victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell silent, wondering
what would chance, for their eyes were on the trees and they feared
them.
The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and man,
they were unwilling to pass in. The trees were grey and menacing,
and a shadow or a mist was about them. The ends of their long
sweeping boughs hung down like searching ﬁngers, their roots stood
up from the ground like the limbs of strange monsters, and dark
caverns opened beneath them. But Gandalf went forward, leading
the company, and where the road from the Hornburg met the trees
they saw now an opening like an arched gate under mighty boughs;
and through it Gandalf passed, and they followed him. Then to their
amazement they found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream
beside it; and the sky was open above and full of golden light. But
on either side the great aisles of the wood were already wrapped in
dusk, stretching away into impenetrable shadows; and there they
heard the creaking and groaning of boughs, and far cries, and a
rumour of wordless voices, murmuring angrily. No Orc or other living
creature could be seen.
Legolas and Gimli were now riding together upon one horse; and
they kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood.
‘It is hot in here,’ said Legolas to Gandalf. ‘I feel a great wrath
about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf.
‘What has become of the miserable Orcs?’ said Legolas.
‘That, I think, no one will ever know,’ said Gandalf.
They rode in silence for a while; but Legolas was ever glancing
from side to side, and would often have halted to listen to the sounds
of the wood, if Gimli had allowed it.
‘These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,’ he said; ‘and I have
seen many an oak grow from acorn to ruinous age. I wish that there
were leisure now to walk among them: they have voices, and in time
I might come to understand their thought.’
‘No, no!’ said Gimli. ‘Let us leave them! I guess their thought
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their speech is of
crushing and strangling.’

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

547

‘Not of all that go on two legs,’ said Legolas. ‘There I think you
are wrong. It is Orcs that they hate. For they do not belong here and
know little of Elves and Men. Far away are the valleys where they
sprang. From the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they
come, I guess.’
‘Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth,’ said Gimli.
‘I should be grateful for the part they have played, but I do not love
them. You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater
wonder in this land, more beautiful than any grove or glade that ever
grew: my heart is still full of it.
‘Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the
marvels of the Northern World, and what do they say of it? Caves,
they say! Caves! Holes to ﬂy to in time of war, to store fodder in!
My good Legolas, do you know that the caverns of Helm’s Deep are
vast and beautiful? There would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves,
merely to gaze at them, if such things were known to be. Aye indeed,
they would pay pure gold for a brief glance!’
‘And I would give gold to be excused,’ said Legolas; ‘and double
to be let out, if I strayed in!’
‘You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,’ said Gimli. ‘But you
speak like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King
dwells under the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their
making long ago? They are but hovels compared with the caverns I
have seen here: immeasurable halls, ﬁlled with an everlasting music of
water that tinkles into pools, as fair as Kheled-zâram in the starlight.
‘And, Legolas, when the torches are kindled and men walk on the
sandy ﬂoors under the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas, gems and
crystals and veins of precious ore glint in the polished walls; and the
light glows through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living
hands of Queen Galadriel. There are columns of white and saffron
and dawn-rose, Legolas, ﬂuted and twisted into dreamlike forms;
they spring up from many-coloured ﬂoors to meet the glistening
pendants of the roof: wings, ropes, curtains ﬁne as frozen clouds;
spears, banners, pinnacles of suspended palaces! Still lakes mirror
them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered with clear
glass; cities, such as the mind of Durin could scarce have imagined in
his sleep, stretch on through avenues and pillared courts, on into the
dark recesses where no light can come. And plink! a silver drop falls,
and the round wrinkles in the glass make all the towers bend and
waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening
comes: they fade and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another
chamber and another dream. There is chamber after chamber,
Legolas; hall opening out of hall, dome after dome, stair beyond stair;
and still the winding paths lead on into the mountains’ heart. Caves!

548

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The Caverns of Helm’s Deep! Happy was the chance that drove me
there! It makes me weep to leave them.’
‘Then I will wish you this fortune for your comfort, Gimli,’ said
the Elf, ‘that you may come safe from war and return to see them
again. But do not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for
them to do, from your account. Maybe the men of this land are wise
to say little: one family of busy dwarves with hammer and chisel
might mar more than they made.’
‘No, you do not understand,’ said Gimli. ‘No dwarf could be
unmoved by such loveliness. None of Durin’s race would mine those
caves for stones or ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there.
Do you cut down groves of blossoming trees in the springtime for
ﬁrewood? We would tend these glades of ﬂowering stone, not quarry
them. With cautious skill, tap by tap – a small chip of rock and no
more, perhaps, in a whole anxious day – so we could work, and as
the years went by, we should open up new ways, and display far
chambers that are still dark, glimpsed only as a void beyond ﬁssures
in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps
as once shone in Khazad-dûm; and when we wished we would drive
away the night that has lain there since the hills were made; and
when we desired rest, we would let the night return.’
‘You move me, Gimli,’ said Legolas. ‘I have never heard you speak
like this before. Almost you make me regret that I have not seen
these caves. Come! Let us make this bargain – if we both return safe
out of the perils that await us, we will journey for a while together.
You shall visit Fangorn with me, and then I will come with you to
see Helm’s Deep.’
‘That would not be the way of return that I should choose,’ said
Gimli. ‘But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come
back to the caves and share their wonder with me.’
‘You have my promise,’ said Legolas. ‘But alas! Now we must
leave behind both cave and wood for a while. See! We are coming
to the end of the trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf ?’
‘About ﬁfteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it,’ said
Gandalf: ‘ﬁve from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords; and
ten more from there to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride
all the way this night.’
‘And when we come there, what shall we see?’ asked Gimli. ‘You
may know, but I cannot guess.’
‘I do not know myself for certain,’ answered the wizard. ‘I was
there at nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet
I think that you will not say that the journey was in vain – not though
the Glittering Caves of Aglarond be left behind.’
*
*
*

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

549

At last the company passed through the trees, and found that they
had come to the bottom of the Coomb, where the road from Helm’s
Deep branched, going one way east to Edoras, and the other north to
the Fords of Isen. As they rode from under the eaves of the wood,
Legolas halted and looked back with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry.
‘There are eyes!’ he said. ‘Eyes looking out from the shadows of
the boughs! I never saw such eyes before.’
The others, surprised by his cry, halted and turned; but Legolas
started to ride back.
‘No, no!’ cried Gimli. ‘Do as you please in your madness, but let
me ﬁrst get down from this horse! I wish to see no eyes!’
‘Stay, Legolas Greenleaf !’ said Gandalf. ‘Do not go back into the
wood, not yet! Now is not your time.’
Even as he spoke, there came forward out of the trees three strange
shapes. As tall as trolls they were, twelve feet or more in height; their
strong bodies, stout as young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment
or with hide of close-ﬁtting grey and brown. Their limbs were long,
and their hands had many ﬁngers; their hair was stiff, and their beards
grey-green as moss. They gazed out with solemn eyes, but they were
not looking at the riders: their eyes were bent northwards. Suddenly
they lifted their long hands to their mouths, and sent forth ringing
calls, clear as notes of a horn, but more musical and various. The
calls were answered; and turning again, the riders saw other creatures
of the same kind approaching, striding through the grass. They came
swiftly from the North, walking like wading herons in their gait, but
not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat quicker than
the heron’s wings. The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some set
their hands upon their sword-hilts.
‘You need no weapons,’ said Gandalf. ‘These are but herdsmen.
They are not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.’
So it seemed to be; for as he spoke the tall creatures, without a
glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished.
‘Herdsmen!’ said Théoden. ‘Where are their ﬂocks? What are they,
Gandalf ? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.’
‘They are the shepherds of the trees,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Is it so
long since you listened to tales by the ﬁreside? There are children in
your land who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the
answer to your question. You have seen Ents, O King, Ents out of
Fangorn Forest, which in your tongue you call the Entwood. Did
you think that the name was given only in idle fancy? Nay, Théoden,
it is otherwise: to them you are but the passing tale; all the years
from Eorl the Young to Théoden the Old are of little count to them;
and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.’
The king was silent. ‘Ents!’ he said at length. ‘Out of the shadows

550

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

of legend I begin a little to understand the marvel of the trees, I
think. I have lived to see strange days. Long we have tended our
beasts and our ﬁelds, built our houses, wrought our tools, or ridden
away to help in the wars of Minas Tirith. And that we called the life
of Men, the way of the world. We cared little for what lay beyond
the borders of our land. Songs we have that tell of these things, but
we are forgetting them, teaching them only to children, as a careless
custom. And now the songs have come down among us out of strange
places, and walk visible under the Sun.’
‘You should be glad, Théoden King,’ said Gandalf. ‘For not only
the little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those
things which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not
without allies, even if you know them not.’
‘Yet also I should be sad,’ said Théoden. ‘For however the fortune
of war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and
wonderful shall pass for ever out of Middle-earth?’
‘It may,’ said Gandalf. ‘The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured,
nor made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed.
Let us now go on with the journey we have begun!’
The company turned then away from the Coomb and from the
wood and took the road towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set, already it had sunk behind the rim of the
world; but as they rode out from the shadow of the hills and looked
west to the Gap of Rohan the sky was still red, and a burning light
was under the ﬂoating clouds. Dark against it there wheeled and ﬂew
many black-winged birds. Some passed overhead with mournful cries,
returning to their homes among the rocks.
‘The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-ﬁeld,’ said
Éomer.
They rode now at an easy pace and dark came down upon the
plains about them. The slow moon mounted, now waxing towards
the full, and in its cold silver light the swelling grass-lands rose and
fell like a wide grey sea. They had ridden for some four hours from
the branching of the roads when they drew near to the Fords. Long
slopes ran swiftly down to where the river spread in stony shoals
between high grassy terraces. Borne upon the wind they heard the
howling of wolves. Their hearts were heavy, remembering the many
men that had fallen in battle in this place.
The road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way
through the terraces to the river’s edge, and up again upon the further
side. There were three lines of ﬂat stepping-stones across the stream,
and between them fords for horses, that went from either brink to a
bare eyot in the midst. The riders looked down upon the crossings,

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

551

and it seemed strange to them; for the Fords had ever been a place
full of the rush and chatter of water upon stones; but now they were
silent. The beds of the stream were almost dry, a bare waste of
shingles and grey sand.
´
‘This is become a dreary place,’ said Eomer.
‘What sickness has
befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has destroyed: has he
devoured the springs of Isen too?’
‘So it would seem,’ said Gandalf.
‘Alas!’ said Théoden. ‘Must we pass this way, where the carrionbeasts devour so many good Riders of the Mark?’
‘This is our way,’ said Gandalf. ‘Grievous is the fall of your men;
but you shall see that at least the wolves of the mountains do not
devour them. It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their
feast: such indeed is the friendship of their kind. Come!’
They rode down to the river, and as they came the wolves ceased
their howling and slunk away. Fear fell on them seeing Gandalf in
the moon, and Shadowfax his horse shining like silver. The riders
passed over to the islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from
the shadows of the banks.
‘Look!’ said Gandalf. ‘Friends have laboured here.’
And they saw that in the midst of the eyot a mound was piled,
ringed with stones, and set about with many spears.
‘Here lie all the Men of the Mark that fell near this place,’ said
Gandalf.
´
‘Here let them rest!’ said Eomer.
‘And when their spears have
rotted and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the
Fords of Isen!’
‘Is this your work also, Gandalf, my friend?’ said Théoden. ‘You
accomplished much in an evening and a night!’
‘With the help of Shadowfax – and others,’ said Gandalf. ‘I rode
fast and far. But here beside the mound I will say this for your
comfort: many fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour
made them. More were scattered than were slain; I gathered together
all that I could ﬁnd. Some men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold to
join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make this burial. They have now
followed your marshal, Elfhelm. I sent him with many Riders to
Edoras. Saruman I knew had despatched his full strength against
you, and his servants had turned aside from all other errands and
gone to Helm’s Deep: the lands seemed empty of enemies; yet I
feared that wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless to
Meduseld, while it was undefended. But now I think you need not
fear: you will ﬁnd your house to welcome your return.’
‘And glad shall I be to see it again,’ said Théoden, ‘though brief
now, I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.’

552

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

With that the company said farewell to the island and the mound,
and passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they
rode on, glad to have left the mournful Fords. As they went the
howling of the wolves broke out anew.
There was an ancient highway that ran down from Isengard to the
crossings. For some way it took its course beside the river, bending
with it east and then north; but at the last it turned away and went
straight towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the
mountain-side in the west of the valley, sixteen miles or more from
its mouth. This road they followed but they did not ride upon it; for
the ground beside it was ﬁrm and level, covered for many miles
about with short springing turf. They rode now more swiftly, and by
midnight the Fords were nearly ﬁve leagues behind. Then they halted,
ending their night’s journey, for the King was weary. They were come
to the feet of the Misty Mountains, and the long arms of Nan Curunı́r
stretched down to meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the
moon had passed into the West, and its light was hidden by the hills.
But out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and
vapour; as it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and
spread in shimmering billows, black and silver, over the starry sky.
‘What do you think of that, Gandalf ?’ asked Aragorn. ‘One would
say that all the Wizard’s Vale was burning.’
´
‘There is ever a fume above that valley in these days,’ said Eomer:
‘but I have never seen aught like this before. These are steams rather
than smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he
is boiling all the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.’
‘Maybe he is,’ said Gandalf. ‘Tomorrow we shall learn what he is
doing. Now let us rest for a while, if we can.’
They camped beside the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent
and empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the
watchmen cried out, and all awoke. The moon was gone. Stars were
shining above; but over the ground there crept a darkness blacker
than the night. On both sides of the river it rolled towards them,
going northward.
‘Stay where you are!’ said Gandalf. ‘Draw no weapons! Wait! and
it will pass you by!’
A mist gathered about them. Above them a few stars still glimmered faintly; but on either side there arose walls of impenetrable
gloom; they were in a narrow lane between moving towers of shadow.
Voices they heard, whisperings and groanings and an endless rustling
sigh; the earth shook under them. Long it seemed to them that they
sat and were afraid; but at last the darkness and the rumour passed,
and vanished between the mountain’s arms.
*
*
*

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

553

Away south upon the Hornburg, in the middle night men heard
a great noise, as a wind in the valley, and the ground trembled; and
all were afraid and no one ventured to go forth. But in the morning
they went out and were amazed; for the slain Orcs were gone, and
the trees also. Far down into the valley of the Deep the grass was
crushed and trampled brown, as if giant herdsmen had pastured great
droves of cattle there; but a mile below the Dike a huge pit had been
delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled into a hill. Men
believed that the Orcs whom they had slain were buried there; but
whether those who had ﬂed into the wood were with them, none
could say, for no man ever set foot upon that hill. The Death Down
it was afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the
strange trees were never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had
returned at night, and had gone far away to the dark dales of Fangorn.
Thus they were revenged upon the Orcs.
The king and his company slept no more that night; but they saw
and heard no other strange thing, save one: the voice of the river
beside them suddenly awoke. There was a rush of water hurrying
down among the stones; and when it had passed, the Isen ﬂowed
and bubbled in its bed again, as it had ever done.
At dawn they made ready to go on. The light came grey and pale,
and they did not see the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy
with fog, and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly,
riding now upon the highway. It was broad and hard, and welltended. Dimly through the mists they could descry the long arm of
the mountains rising on their left. They had passed into Nan Curunı́r,
the Wizard’s Vale. That was a sheltered valley, open only to the
South. Once it had been fair and green, and through it the Isen
ﬂowed, already deep and strong before it found the plains; for it was
fed by many springs and lesser streams among the rain-washed hills,
and all about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land.
It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were
acres tilled by the slaves of Saruman; but most of the valley had
become a wilderness of weeds and thorns. Brambles trailed upon the
ground, or clambering over bush and bank, made shaggy caves where
small beasts housed. No trees grew there; but among the rank grasses
could still be seen the burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves.
It was a sad country, silent now but for the stony noise of quick
waters. Smokes and steams drifted in sullen clouds and lurked in the
hollows. The riders did not speak. Many doubted in their hearts,
wondering to what dismal end their journey led.
After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide
street, paved with great ﬂat stones, squared and laid with skill; no

554

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

blade of grass was seen in any joint. Deep gutters, ﬁlled with trickling
water, ran down on either side. Suddenly a tall pillar loomed up
before them. It was black; and set upon it was a great stone, carved
and painted in the likeness of a long White Hand. Its ﬁnger pointed
north. Not far now they knew that the gates of Isengard must stand,
and their hearts were heavy; but their eyes could not pierce the mists
ahead.
Beneath the mountain’s arm within the Wizard’s Vale through
years uncounted had stood that ancient place that Men called Isengard. Partly it was shaped in the making of the mountains, but mighty
works the Men of Westernesse had wrought there of old; and
Saruman had dwelt there long and had not been idle.
This was its fashion, while Saruman was at his height, accounted
by many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering
cliffs, stood out from the shelter of the mountain-side, from which
it ran and then returned again. One entrance only was there made
in it, a great arch delved in the southern wall. Here through the black
rock a long tunnel had been hewn, closed at either end with mighty
doors of iron. They were so wrought and poised upon their huge
hinges, posts of steel driven into the living stone, that when unbarred
they could be moved with a light thrust of the arms, noiselessly. One
who passed in and came at length out of the echoing tunnel, beheld
a plain, a great circle, somewhat hollowed like a vast shallow bowl:
a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and
ﬁlled with avenues, and groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams
that ﬂowed from the mountains to a lake. But no green thing grew
there in the latter days of Saruman. The roads were paved with
stone-ﬂags, dark and hard; and beside their borders instead of trees
there marched long lines of pillars, some of marble, some of copper
and of iron, joined by heavy chains.
Many houses there were, chambers, halls, and passages, cut and
tunnelled back into the walls upon their inner side, so that all the
open circle was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors.
Thousands could dwell there, workers, servants, slaves, and warriors
with great store of arms; wolves were fed and stabled in deep dens
beneath. The plain, too, was bored and delved. Shafts were driven
deep into the ground; their upper ends were covered by low mounds
and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the Ring of Isengard
looked like a graveyard of unquiet dead. For the ground trembled.
The shafts ran down by many slopes and spiral stairs to caverns
far under; there Saruman had treasuries, store-houses, armouries,
smithies, and great furnaces. Iron wheels revolved there endlessly,
and hammers thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

555

vents, lit from beneath with red light, or blue, or venomous green.
To the centre all the roads ran between their chains. There stood
a tower of marvellous shape. It was fashioned by the builders of old,
who smoothed the Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed a thing not
made by the craft of Men, but riven from the bones of the earth in
the ancient torment of the hills. A peak and isle of rock it was,
black and gleaming hard: four mighty piers of many-sided stone were
welded into one, but near the summit they opened into gaping horns,
their pinnacles sharp as the points of spears, keen-edged as knives.
Between them was a narrow space, and there upon a ﬂoor of polished
stone, written with strange signs, a man might stand ﬁve hundred
feet above the plain. This was Orthanc, the citadel of Saruman, the
name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for in
the Elvish speech orthanc signiﬁes Mount Fang, but in the language
of the Mark of old the Cunning Mind.
A strong place and wonderful was Isengard, and long it had been
beautiful; and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of Gondor
upon the West, and wise men that watched the stars. But Saruman
had slowly shaped it to his shifting purposes, and made it better, as
he thought, being deceived – for all those arts and subtle devices, for
which he forsook his former wisdom, and which fondly he imagined
were his own, came but from Mordor; so that what he made was
naught, only a little copy, a child’s model or a slave’s ﬂattery, of that
vast fortress, armoury, prison, furnace of great power, Barad-dûr, the
Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed at ﬂattery, biding
its time, secure in its pride and its immeasurable strength.
This was the stronghold of Saruman, as fame reported it; for
within living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates,
save perhaps a few, such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and
told no man what they saw.
Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it;
and as he did so the Riders saw to their wonder that the Hand
appeared no longer white. It was stained as with dried blood; and
looking closer they perceived that its nails were red. Unheeding Gandalf rode on into the mist, and reluctantly they followed him. All
about them now, as if there had been a sudden ﬂood, wide pools of
water lay beside the road, ﬁlling the hollows, and rills went trickling
down among the stones.
At last Gandalf halted and beckoned to them; and they came, and
saw that beyond him the mists had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone.
The hour of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of
Isengard.
But the doors lay hurled and twisted on the ground. And all about,

556

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

stone, cracked and splintered into countless jagged shards, was scattered far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch still
stood, but it opened now upon a rooﬂess chasm: the tunnel was laid
bare, and through the cliff-like walls on either side great rents and
breaches had been torn; their towers were beaten into dust. If the
Great Sea had risen in wrath and fallen on the hills with storm, it
could have worked no greater ruin.
The ring beyond was ﬁlled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in which there heaved and ﬂoated a wreckage of beams and
spars, chests and casks and broken gear. Twisted and leaning pillars
reared their splintered stems above the ﬂood, but all the roads were
drowned. Far off, it seemed, half veiled in winding cloud, there
loomed the island rock. Still dark and tall, unbroken by the storm,
the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped about its feet.
The king and all his company sat silent on their horses, marvelling,
perceiving that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they
could not guess. And now they turned their eyes towards the archway
and the ruined gates. There they saw close beside them a great rubbleheap; and suddenly they were aware of two small ﬁgures lying on it
at their ease, grey-clad, hardly to be seen among the stones. There
were bottles and bowls and platters laid beside them, as if they had
just eaten well, and now rested from their labour. One seemed asleep;
the other, with crossed legs and arms behind his head, leaned back
against a broken rock and sent from his mouth long wisps and little
rings of thin blue smoke.
´
For a moment Théoden and Eomer
and all his men stared at them
in wonder. Amid all the wreck of Isengard this seemed to them the
strangest sight. But before the king could speak, the small smokebreathing ﬁgure became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there
silent on the edge of the mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man
he looked, or like one, though not much more than half a man in
height; his head of brown curling hair was uncovered, but he was
clad in a travel-stained cloak of the same hue and shape as the companions of Gandalf had worn when they rode to Edoras. He bowed
very low, putting his hand upon his breast. Then, seeming not to
´
observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Eomer
and the king.
‘Welcome, my lords, to Isengard!’ he said. ‘We are the doorwardens. Meriadoc, son of Saradoc is my name; and my companion, who,
alas! is overcome with weariness’ – here he gave the other a dig with
his foot – ‘is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the House of Took. Far in
the North is our home. The Lord Saruman is within; but at the
moment he is closeted with one Wormtongue, or doubtless he would
be here to welcome such honourable guests.’

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

557

‘Doubtless he would!’ laughed Gandalf. ‘And was it Saruman that
ordered you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival
of guests, when your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?’
‘No, good sir, the matter escaped him,’ answered Merry gravely.
‘He has been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who
has taken over the management of Isengard. He commanded me
to welcome the Lord of Rohan with ﬁtting words. I have done my
best.’
‘And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me?’
cried Gimli, unable to contain himself longer. ‘You rascals, you
woolly-footed and wool-pated truants! A ﬁne hunt you have led us!
Two hundred leagues, through fen and forest, battle and death, to
rescue you! And here we ﬁnd you feasting and idling – and smoking!
Smoking! Where did you come by the weed, you villains? Hammer
and tongs! I am so torn between rage and joy, that if I do not burst,
it will be a marvel!’
‘You speak for me, Gimli,’ laughed Legolas. ‘Though I would
sooner learn how they came by the wine.’
‘One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that’s brighter
wits,’ said Pippin, opening an eye. ‘Here you ﬁnd us sitting on a ﬁeld
of victory, amid the plunder of armies, and you wonder how we came
by a few well-earned comforts!’
‘Well-earned?’ said Gimli. ‘I cannot believe that!’
The Riders laughed. ‘It cannot be doubted that we witness the
meeting of dear friends,’ said Théoden. ‘So these are the lost ones
of your company, Gandalf ? The days are fated to be ﬁlled with
marvels. Already I have seen many since I left my house; and now
here before my eyes stand yet another of the folk of legend. Are not
these the Halﬂings, that some among us call the Holbytlan?’
‘Hobbits, if you please, lord,’ said Pippin.
‘Hobbits?’ said Théoden. ‘Your tongue is strangely changed; but
the name sounds not unﬁtting so. Hobbits! No report that I have
heard does justice to the truth.’
Merry bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. ‘You are gracious, lord; or I hope that I may so take your words,’ he said. ‘And
here is another marvel! I have wandered in many lands, since I left
my home, and never till now have I found people that knew any story
concerning hobbits.’
‘My people came out of the North long ago,’ said Théoden. ‘But
I will not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is
said among us is that far away, over many hills and rivers, live the
halﬂing folk that dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no
legends of their deeds, for it is said that they do little, and avoid the
sight of men, being able to vanish in a twinkling; and they can change

558

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

their voices to resemble the piping of birds. But it seems that more
could be said.’
‘It could indeed, lord,’ said Merry.
‘For one thing,’ said Théoden, ‘I had not heard that they spouted
smoke from their mouths.’
‘That is not surprising,’ answered Merry; ‘for it is an art which
we have not practised for more than a few generations. It was Tobold
Hornblower, of Longbottom in the Southfarthing, who ﬁrst grew the
true pipe-weed in his gardens, about the year 1070 according to our
reckoning. How old Toby came by the plant . . .’
‘You do not know your danger, Théoden,’ interrupted Gandalf.
‘These hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures
of the table, or the small doings of their fathers, grandfathers, and
great-grandfathers, and remoter cousins to the ninth degree, if you
encourage them with undue patience. Some other time would be
more ﬁtting for the history of smoking. Where is Treebeard, Merry?’
‘Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink – of
clean water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their
work – over there.’ Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake;
and as they looked, they heard a distant rumbling and rattling, as if
an avalanche was falling from the mountain-side. Far away came a
hoom-hom, as of horns blowing triumphantly.
‘And is Orthanc then left unguarded?’ asked Gandalf.
‘There is the water,’ said Merry. ‘But Quickbeam and some others
are watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain are of
Saruman’s planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot
of the stair.’
‘Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,’ said Legolas, ‘but his arms are at
his sides, and he stands as still as a door-tree.’
‘It is past noon,’ said Gandalf, ‘and we at any rate have not eaten
since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be.
Did he leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from
your mind?’
‘He left a message,’ said Merry, ‘and I was coming to it, but I
have been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if
the Lord of the Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall they
will ﬁnd Treebeard there, and he will welcome them. I may add that
they will also ﬁnd food of the best there, it was discovered and selected
by your humble servants.’ He bowed.
Gandalf laughed. ‘That is better!’ he said. ‘Well, Théoden, will you
ride with me to ﬁnd Treebeard? We must go round about, but it is not
far. When you see Treebeard, you will learn much. For Treebeard is
Fangorn, and the eldest and chief of the Ents, and when you speak with
him you will hear the speech of the oldest of all living things.’

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

559

‘I will come with you,’ said Théoden. ‘Farewell, my hobbits! May
we meet again in my house! There you shall sit beside me and tell
me all that your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires, as far as
you can reckon them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and
his herb-lore. Farewell!’
The hobbits bowed low. ‘So that is the King of Rohan!’ said Pippin
in an undertone. ‘A ﬁne old fellow. Very polite.’

Chapter 9
FLOTSAM AND JETSAM
Gandalf and the King’s company rode away, turning eastward to
make the circuit of the ruined walls of Isengard. But Aragorn, Gimli,
and Legolas remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to stray in
search of grass, they came and sat beside the hobbits.
‘Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where
none of us ever thought to come,’ said Aragorn.
‘And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters,’
said Legolas, ‘the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to their own
small riddles. We tracked you as far as the forest, but there are still
many things that I should like to know the truth of.’
‘And there is a great deal, too, that we want to know about you,’
said Merry. ‘We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old
Ent, but that is not nearly enough.’
‘All in good time,’ said Legolas. ‘We were the hunters, and you
should give an account of yourselves to us ﬁrst.’
‘Or second,’ said Gimli. ‘It would go better after a meal. I have a
sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make amends
by ﬁnding us some of the plunder that you spoke of. Food and drink
would pay off some of my score against you.’
‘Then you shall have it,’ said Pippin. ‘Will you have it here, or in
more comfort in what’s left of Saruman’s guard-house – over there
under the arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on
the road.’
‘Less than an eye!’ said Gimli. ‘But I will not go into any orc-house;
nor touch Orcs’ meat or anything that they have mauled.’
‘We wouldn’t ask you to,’ said Merry. ‘We have had enough of
Orcs ourselves to last a life-time. But there were many other folk in
Isengard. Saruman kept enough wisdom not to trust his Orcs. He
had Men to guard his gates: some of his most faithful servants, I
suppose. Anyway they were favoured and got good provisions.’
‘And pipe-weed?’ asked Gimli.
‘No, I don’t think so,’ Merry laughed. ‘But that is another story,
which can wait until after lunch.’
‘Well let us go and have lunch then!’ said the Dwarf.
The hobbits led the way; and they passed under the arch and came
to a wide door upon the left, at the top of a stair. It opened direct
into a large chamber, with other smaller doors at the far end, and a

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

563

my old wooden pipe. And here’s another: an unused one. I have
carried it a long way, though I don’t know why. I never really expected
to ﬁnd any pipe-weed on the journey, when my own ran out. But
now it comes in useful after all.’ He held up a small pipe with a wide
ﬂattened bowl, and handed it to Gimli. ‘Does that settle the score
between us?’ he said.
‘Settle it!’ cried Gimli. ‘Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in
your debt.’
‘Well, I am going back into the open air, to see what the wind
and sky are doing!’ said Legolas.
‘We will come with you,’ said Aragorn.
They went out and seated themselves upon the piled stones before
the gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists
were lifting and ﬂoating away upon the breeze.
‘Now let us take our ease here for a little!’ said Aragorn. ‘We will
sit on the edge of ruin and talk, as Gandalf says, while he is busy
elsewhere. I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before.’ He
wrapped his grey cloak about him, hiding his mail-shirt, and stretched
out his long legs. Then he lay back and sent from his lips a thin
stream of smoke.
‘Look!’ said Pippin. ‘Strider the Ranger has come back!’
‘He has never been away,’ said Aragorn. ‘I am Strider and Dúnadan too, and I belong both to Gondor and the North.’
They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them;
slanting into the valley from among white clouds high in the West.
Legolas lay still, looking up at the sun and sky with steady eyes, and
singing softly to himself. At last he sat up. ‘Come now!’ he said.
‘Time wears on, and the mists are blowing away, or would if you
strange folk did not wreathe yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?’
‘Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and ﬁnding myself
all strung-up in an orc-camp,’ said Pippin. ‘Let me see, what is
today?’
‘The ﬁfth of March in the Shire-reckoning,’ said Aragorn. Pippin
made some calculations on his ﬁngers. ‘Only nine days ago!’ he said.*
‘It seems a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was
like a bad dream, I reckon that three very horrible days followed.
Merry will correct me, if I forget anything important: I am not going
into details: the whips and the ﬁlth and stench and all that; it does
not bear remembering.’ With that he plunged into an account of
Boromir’s last ﬁght and the orc-march from Emyn Muil to the Forest.
* Every month in the Shire-calendar had 30 days.

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

567

mering on the doors, and calling for Saruman. There was no answer,
except arrows and stones from the walls. But arrows are no use
against Ents. They hurt them, of course, and infuriate them: like
stinging ﬂies. But an Ent can be stuck as full of orc-arrows as a
pin-cushion, and take no serious harm. They cannot be poisoned,
for one thing; and their skin seems to be very thick, and tougher than
bark. It takes a very heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They
don’t like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe-men
to one Ent: a man that hacks once at an Ent never gets a chance of
a second blow. A punch from an Ent-ﬁst crumples up iron like thin
tin.
‘When Treebeard had got a few arrows in him, he began to warm
up, to get positively ‘‘hasty’’, as he would say. He let out a great
hoom-hom, and a dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent
is terrifying. Their ﬁngers, and their toes, just freeze on to rock; and
they tear it up like bread-crust. It was like watching the work of great
tree-roots in a hundred years, all packed into a few moments.
‘They pushed, pulled, tore, shook, and hammered; and clang-bang,
crash-crack, in ﬁve minutes they had these huge gates just lying in
ruin; and some were already beginning to eat into the walls, like
rabbits in a sand-pit. I don’t know what Saruman thought was happening; but anyway he did not know how to deal with it. His wizardry
may have been falling off lately, of course; but anyway I think he has
not much grit, not much plain courage alone in a tight place without
a lot of slaves and machines and things, if you know what I mean.
Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame was not all
along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.’
‘No,’ said Aragorn. ‘Once he was as great as his fame made him.
His knowledge was deep, his thought was subtle, and his hands marvellously skilled; and he had a power over the minds of others. The
wise he could persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That
power he certainly still keeps. There are not many in Middle-earth
that I should say were safe, if they were left alone to talk with
him, even now when he has suffered a defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and
Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has been laid bare, but
very few others.’
‘The Ents are safe,’ said Pippin. ‘He seems at one time to have
got round them, but never again. And anyway he did not understand
them; and he made the great mistake of leaving them out of his
calculations. He had no plan for them, and there was no time to
make any, once they had set to work. As soon as our attack began,
the few remaining rats in Isengard started bolting through every hole
that the Ents made. The Ents let the Men go, after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down at this end. I don’t think

570

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was the sound of a rider coming swiftly up the road. Merry and I lay
quiet, and Treebeard hid himself in the shadows under the arch.
Suddenly a great horse came striding up, like a ﬂash of silver. It was
already dark, but I could see the rider’s face clearly: it seemed to
shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat up, staring, with my
mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn’t.
‘There was no need. He halted just by us and looked down at us.
‘‘Gandalf !’’ I said at last, but my voice was only a whisper. Did he
say: ‘‘Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!’’? No, indeed! He
said: ‘‘Get up, you tom-fool of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder,
in all this ruin is Treebeard? I want him. Quick!’’
‘Treebeard heard his voice and came out of the shadows at once;
and there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of
them seemed surprised at all. Gandalf obviously expected to ﬁnd
Treebeard here; and Treebeard might almost have been loitering
about near the gates on purpose to meet him. Yet we had told the
old Ent all about Moria. But then I remembered a queer look he
gave us at the time. I can only suppose that he had seen Gandalf or
had some news of him, but would not say anything in a hurry. ‘‘Don’t
be hasty’’ is his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say much
about Gandalf ’s movements when he is not there.
‘ ‘‘Hoom! Gandalf !’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘I am glad you have come.
Wood and water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard
to manage here.’’
‘ ‘‘Treebeard,’’ said Gandalf. ‘‘I need your help. You have done
much, but I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage.’’
‘Then those two went off and had a council together in some
corner. It must have seemed very hasty to Treebeard, for Gandalf
was in a tremendous hurry, and was already talking at a great pace,
before they passed out of hearing. They were only away a matter of
minutes, perhaps a quarter of an hour. Then Gandalf came back to
us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He did say he was glad
to see us, then.
‘ ‘‘But Gandalf,’’ I cried, ‘‘where have you been? And have you
seen the others?’’
‘ ‘‘Wherever I have been, I am back,’’ he answered in the genuine
Gandalf manner. ‘‘Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news
must wait. This is a perilous night, and I must ride fast. But the
dawn may be brighter; and if so, we shall meet again. Take care of
yourselves, and keep away from Orthanc! Good-bye!’’
‘Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had
evidently learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He looked
at us and said: ‘‘Hm, well, I ﬁnd you are not such hasty folk as I
thought. You said much less than you might, and no more than you

572

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

caught like Orcs in a hole; but we found a winding stair at the back
of the store-room that brought us out on top of the arch. It was a
squeeze to get out, as the passages had been cracked and half blocked
with fallen stone near the top. There we sat high up above the ﬂoods
and watched the drowning of Isengard. The Ents kept on pouring in
more water, till all the ﬁres were quenched and every cave ﬁlled. The
fogs slowly gathered together and steamed up into a huge umbrella
of cloud: it must have been a mile high. In the evening there was a
great rainbow over the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted
out by a thick drizzle on the mountain-sides. It all went very quiet.
A few wolves howled mournfully, far away. The Ents stopped the
inﬂow in the night, and sent the Isen back into its old course. And
that was the end of it all.
‘Since then the water has been sinking again. There must be outlets
somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps
out of any of his windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We
felt very lonely. Not even a visible Ent to talk to in all the ruin; and
no news. We spent the night up on top there above the arch, and it
was cold and damp and we did not sleep. We had a feeling that
anything might happen at any minute. Saruman is still in his tower.
There was a noise in the night like a wind coming up the valley. I
think the Ents and Huorns that had been away came back then; but
where they have all gone to now, I don’t know. It was a misty, moisty
morning when we climbed down and looked round again, and nobody
was about. And that is about all there is to tell. It seems almost
peaceful now after all the turmoil. And safer too, somehow, since
Gandalf came back. I could sleep!’
They all fell silent for a while. Gimli re-ﬁlled his pipe. ‘There is
one thing I wonder about,’ he said as he lit it with his ﬂint and tinder:
‘Wormtongue. You told Théoden he was with Saruman. How did
he get there?’
‘Oh yes, I forgot about him,’ said Pippin. ‘He did not get here till
this morning. We had just lit the ﬁre and had some breakfast when
Treebeard appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our
names outside.
‘ ‘‘I have just come round to see how you are faring, my lads,’’ he
said; ‘‘and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All’s well;
aye very well indeed!’’ he laughed, and slapped his thighs. ‘‘No more
Orcs in Isengard, no more axes! And there will be folk coming up from
the South before the day is old; some that you may be glad to see.’’
‘He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on
the road. We rushed out before the gates, and I stood and stared,

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

573

half expecting to see Strider and Gandalf come riding up at the head
of an army. But out of the mist there rode a man on an old tired
horse; and he looked a queer twisted sort of creature himself. There
was no one else. When he came out of the mist and suddenly saw
all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he sat and gaped, and his
face went almost green. He was so bewildered that he did not seem
to notice us at ﬁrst. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to turn
his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides, put
out a long arm, and lifted him out of the saddle. His horse bolted in
terror, and he grovelled on the ground. He said he was Grı́ma, friend
and counsellor of the king, and had been sent with important messages from Théoden to Saruman.
‘ ‘‘No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full
of foul Orcs,’’ he said, ‘‘so I was sent. And I have had a perilous
journey, and I am hungry and weary. I ﬂed far north out of my way,
pursued by wolves.’’
‘I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to
myself ‘‘liar’’. Treebeard looked at him in his long slow way for
several minutes, till the wretched man was squirming on the ﬂoor.
Then at last he said: ‘‘Ha, hm, I was expecting you, Master Wormtongue.’’ The man started at that name. ‘‘Gandalf got here ﬁrst. So
I know as much about you as I need, and I know what to do with
you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. I am the
master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you
can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of.’’
‘ ‘‘Let me go, let me go!’’ said Wormtongue. ‘‘I know the way.’’
‘ ‘‘You knew the way, I don’t doubt,’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘But things
have changed here a little. Go and see!’’
‘He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch, with
us close behind, until he came inside the ring and could see all the
ﬂoods that lay between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us.
‘ ‘‘Let me go away!’’ he whined. ‘‘Let me go away! My messages
are useless now.’’
‘ ‘‘They are indeed,’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘But you have only two
choices: to stay with me until Gandalf and your master arrive; or to
cross the water. Which will you have?’’
‘The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot
into the water; but he drew back. ‘‘I cannot swim,’’ he said.
‘ ‘‘The water is not deep,’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘It is dirty, but that
will not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!’’
‘With that the wretch ﬂoundered off into the ﬂood. It rose up
nearly to his neck before he got too far away for me to see him. The
last I saw of him was clinging to some old barrel or piece of wood.
But Treebeard waded after him, and watched his progress.

574

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘ ‘‘Well, he has gone in,’’ he said when he returned. ‘‘I saw him
crawling up the steps like a draggled rat. There is someone in the
tower still: a hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and
I hope the welcome is to his liking. Now I must go and wash myself
clean of the slime. I’ll be away up on the north side, if anyone wants
to see me. There is no clean water down here ﬁt for an Ent to drink,
or to bathe in. So I will ask you two lads to keep a watch at the gate
for the folk that are coming. There’ll be the Lord of the Fields of
Rohan, mark you! You must welcome him as well as you know how:
his men have fought a great ﬁght with the Orcs. Maybe, you know
the right fashion of Men’s words for such a lord, better than Ents.
There have been many lords in the green ﬁelds in my time, and I
have never learned their speech or their names. They will be wanting
man-food, and you know all about that, I guess. So ﬁnd what you
think is ﬁt for a king to eat, if you can.’’ And that is the end of the
story. Though I should like to know who this Wormtongue is. Was
he really the king’s counsellor?’
‘He was,’ said Aragorn; ‘and also Saruman’s spy and servant in
Rohan. Fate has not been kinder to him than he deserves. The sight
of the ruin of all that he thought so strong and magniﬁcent must
have been almost punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits
him.’
‘Yes, I don’t suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of kindness,’ said Merry. ‘He seemed rather grimly delighted with the
business, and was laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe
and drink. We spent a busy time after that, searching the ﬂotsam, and
rummaging about. We found two or three store-rooms in different
places nearby, above the ﬂood-level. But Treebeard sent some Ents
down, and they carried off a great deal of the stuff.
‘ ‘‘We want man-food for twenty-ﬁve,’’ the Ents said, so you can
see that somebody had counted your company carefully before you
arrived. You three were evidently meant to go with the great people.
But you would not have fared any better. We kept as good as we
sent, I promise you. Better, because we sent no drink.
‘ ‘‘What about drink?’’ I said to the Ents.
‘ ‘‘There is water of Isen,’’ they said, ‘‘and that is good enough
for Ents and Men.’’ But I hope that the Ents may have found time
to brew some of their draughts from the mountain-springs, and we
shall see Gandalf ’s beard curling when he returns. After the Ents
had gone, we felt tired, and hungry. But we did not grumble – our
labours had been well rewarded. It was through our search for manfood that Pippin discovered the prize of all the ﬂotsam, those Hornblower barrels. ‘‘Pipe-weed is better after food,’’ said Pippin; that is
how the situation arose.’

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

575

‘We understand it all perfectly now,’ said Gimli.
‘All except one thing,’ said Aragorn: ‘leaf from the Southfarthing
in Isengard. The more I consider it, the more curious I ﬁnd it. I have
never been in Isengard, but I have journeyed in this land, and I
know well the empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire.
Neither goods nor folk have passed that way for many a long year,
not openly. Saruman had secret dealings with someone in the Shire,
I guess. Wormtongues may be found in other houses than King
Théoden’s. Was there a date on the barrels?’
‘Yes,’ said Pippin. ‘It was the 1417 crop, that is last year’s; no, the
year before, of course, now: a good year.’
‘Ah well, whatever evil was afoot is over now, I hope; or else it is
beyond our reach at present,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet I think I shall mention it to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great
affairs.’
‘I wonder what he is doing,’ said Merry. ‘The afternoon is getting
on. Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at any
rate, Strider, if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.’

Chapter 10
THE VOICE OF SARUMAN
They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of
stones, gazing at the dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows,
a menace still in the desolation that lay all about it. The waters had
now nearly all subsided. Here and there gloomy pools remained,
covered with scum and wreckage; but most of the wide circle was
bare again, a wilderness of slime and tumbled rock, pitted with blackened holes, and dotted with posts and pillars leaning drunkenly this
way and that. At the rim of the shattered bowl there lay vast mounds
and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great storm; and beyond
them the green and tangled valley ran up into the long ravine between
the dark arms of the mountains. Across the waste they saw riders
picking their way; they were coming from the north side, and already
they were drawing near to Orthanc.
‘There is Gandalf, and Théoden and his men!’ said Legolas. ‘Let
us go and meet them!’
‘Walk warily!’ said Merry. ‘There are loose slabs that may tilt up
and throw you down into a pit, if you don’t take care.’
They followed what was left of the road from the gates to Orthanc,
going slowly, for the ﬂag-stones were cracked and slimed. The riders,
seeing them approach, halted under the shadow of the rock and
waited for them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them.
‘Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting discussions, and
made a few plans,’ he said; ‘and we have all had some much-needed
rest. Now we must be going on again. I hope you companions have
all rested, too, and refreshed yourselves?’
‘We have,’ said Merry. ‘But our discussions began and ended in
smoke. Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.’
‘Do you indeed?’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, I do not. I have now a last
task to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell visit. Dangerous,
and probably useless; but it must be done. Those of you who wish
may come with me – but beware! And do not jest! This is not the
time for it.’
‘I will come,’ said Gimli. ‘I wish to see him and learn if he really
looks like you.’
‘And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf ?’ said Gandalf.
‘Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose
with you. And are you yet wise enough to detect all his counterfeits?

THE VOICE OF SARUMAN

577

Well, we shall see, perhaps. He may be shy of showing himself before
many different eyes together. But I have ordered all the Ents to
remove themselves from sight, so perhaps we shall persuade him to
come out.’
‘What’s the danger?’ asked Pippin. ‘Will he shoot at us, and pour
ﬁre out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?’
‘The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light heart,’
said Gandalf. ‘But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose
to try. A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman
has powers you do not guess. Beware of his voice!’
They came now to the foot of Orthanc. It was black, and the rock
gleamed as if it were wet. The many faces of the stone had sharp
edges as though they had been newly chiselled. A few scorings, and
small ﬂake-like splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore
of the fury of the Ents.
On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great
door, high above the ground; and over it was a shuttered window,
opening upon a balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold
of the door there mounted a ﬂight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn
by some unknown art of the same black stone. This was the only
entrance to the tower; but many tall windows were cut with deep
embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like little eyes
in the sheer faces of the horns.
At the foot of the stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. ‘I will
go up,’ said Gandalf. ‘I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.’
‘And I too will go up,’ said the king. ‘I am old, and fear no peril
any more. I wish to speak with the enemy who has done me so much
´
wrong. Eomer
shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not
falter.’
‘As you will,’ said Gandalf. ‘Aragorn shall come with me. Let the
others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough,
if there is anything to hear or see.’
‘Nay!’ said Gimli. ‘Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone
here represent our kindreds. We also will come behind.’
‘Come then!’ said Gandalf, and with that he climbed the steps,
and Théoden went beside him.
The Riders of Rohan sat uneasily upon their horses, on either side
of the stair, and looked up darkly at the great tower, fearing what
might befall their lord. Merry and Pippin sat on the bottom step,
feeling both unimportant and unsafe.
‘Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!’ muttered Pippin. ‘I wish
I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come
for? We are not wanted.’

578

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on it with his
staff. It rang with a hollow sound. ‘Saruman, Saruman!’ he cried in
a loud commanding voice. ‘Saruman come forth!’
For some time there was no answer. At last the window above the
door was unbarred, but no ﬁgure could be seen at its dark opening.
‘Who is it?’ said a voice. ‘What do you wish?’
Théoden started. ‘I know that voice,’ he said, ‘and I curse the day
when I ﬁrst listened to it.’
‘Go and fetch Saruman, since you have become his footman,
Grı́ma Wormtongue!’ said Gandalf. ‘And do not waste our time!’
The window closed. They waited. Suddenly another voice spoke,
low and melodious, its very sound an enchantment. Those who
listened unwarily to that voice could seldom report the words that
they heard; and if they did, they wondered, for little power remained
in them. Mostly they remembered only that it was a delight to hear
the voice speaking, all that it said seemed wise and reasonable, and
desire awoke in them by swift agreement to seem wise themselves.
When others spoke they seemed harsh and uncouth by contrast; and
if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts of those
under the spell. For some the spell lasted only while the voice spoke
to them, and when it spoke to another they smiled, as men do who
see through a juggler’s trick while others gape at it. For many the
sound of the voice alone was enough to hold them enthralled; but
for those whom it conquered the spell endured when they were far
away, and ever they heard that soft voice whispering and urging them.
But none were unmoved; none rejected its pleas and its commands
without an effort of mind and will, so long as its master had control
of it.
‘Well?’ it said now with gentle question. ‘Why must you disturb
my rest? Will you give me no peace at all by night or day?’ Its tone
was that of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved.
They looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound of his
coming; and they saw a ﬁgure standing at the rail, looking down
upon them: an old man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which
was not easy to tell, for it changed if they moved their eyes or if he
stirred. His face was long, with a high forehead, he had deep darkling
eyes, hard to fathom, though the look that they now bore was grave
and benevolent, and a little weary. His hair and beard were white,
but strands of black still showed about his lips and ears.
‘Like, and yet unlike,’ muttered Gimli.
‘But come now,’ said the soft voice. ‘Two at least of you I know
by name. Gandalf I know too well to have much hope that he seeks
help or counsel here. But you, Théoden Lord of the Mark of Rohan,
are declared by your noble devices, and still more by the fair counten-

THE VOICE OF SARUMAN

579

ance of the House of Eorl. O worthy son of Thengel the Thricerenowned! Why have you not come before, and as a friend? Much
have I desired to see you, mightiest king of western lands, and especially in these latter years, to save you from the unwise and evil counsels
that beset you! Is it yet too late? Despite the injuries that have been
done to me, in which the men of Rohan, alas! have had some part,
still I would save you, and deliver you from the ruin that draws nigh
inevitably, if you ride upon this road which you have taken. Indeed
I alone can aid you now.’
Théoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing.
He looked up at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent
down upon him, and then to Gandalf at his side; and he seemed to
hesitate. Gandalf made no sign; but stood silent as stone, as one
waiting patiently for some call that has not yet come. The Riders
stirred at ﬁrst, murmuring with approval of the words of Saruman;
and then they too were silent, as men spell-bound. It seemed to them
that Gandalf had never spoken so fair and ﬁttingly to their lord.
Rough and proud now seemed all his dealings with Théoden. And
over their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end
of the Mark in a darkness to which Gandalf was driving them, while
Saruman stood beside a door of escape, holding it half open so that
a ray of light came through. There was a heavy silence.
It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. ‘The words of this
wizard stand on their heads,’ he growled, gripping the handle of his
axe. ‘In the language of Orthanc help means ruin, and saving means
slaying, that is plain. But we do not come here to beg.’
‘Peace!’ said Saruman, and for a ﬂeeting moment his voice was
less suave, and a light ﬂickered in his eyes and was gone. ‘I do not
speak to you yet, Gimli Glóin’s son,’ he said. ‘Far away is your home
and small concern of yours are the troubles of this land. But it was
not by design of your own that you became embroiled in them, and
so I will not blame such part as you have played – a valiant one, I
doubt not. But I pray you, allow me ﬁrst to speak with the King of
Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend.
‘What have you to say, Théoden King? Will you have peace with
me, and all the aid that my knowledge, founded in long years, can
bring? Shall we make our counsels together against evil days, and
repair our injuries with such good will that our estates shall both
come to fairer ﬂower than ever before?’
Still Théoden did not answer. Whether he strove with anger or
´
doubt none could say. Eomer
spoke.
‘Lord, hear me!’ he said. ‘Now we feel the peril that we were
warned of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last
amazed by an old liar with honey on his forked tongue? So would

580

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the trapped wolf speak to the hounds, if he could. What aid can he
give to you, forsooth? All he desires is to escape from his plight. But
will you parley with this dealer in treachery and murder? Remember
Théodred at the Fords, and the grave of Háma in Helm’s Deep!’
‘If we speak of poisoned tongues what shall we say of yours, young
serpent?’ said Saruman, and the ﬂash of his anger was now plain to
´
´
see. ‘But come, Eomer,
Eomund’s
son!’ he went on in his soft voice
again. ‘To every man his part. Valour in arms is yours, and you win
high honour thereby. Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and
be content. Meddle not in policies which you do not understand.
But maybe, if you become a king, you will ﬁnd that he must choose
his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and the power of
Orthanc cannot be lightly thrown aside, whatever grievances, real or
fancied, may lie behind. You have won a battle but not a war – and
that with help on which you cannot count again. You may ﬁnd the
Shadow of the Wood at your own door next: it is wayward, and
senseless, and has no love for Men.
‘But my lord of Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because
valiant men have fallen in battle? If you go to war, needlessly, for I
did not desire it, then men will be slain. But if I am a murderer on
that account, then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for
they have fought many wars, and assailed many who deﬁed them.
Yet with some they have afterwards made peace, none the worse for
being politic. I say, Théoden King: shall we have peace and friendship, you and I? It is ours to command.’
‘We will have peace,’ said Théoden at last thickly and with an
effort. Several of the Riders cried out gladly. Théoden held up his
hand. ‘Yes, we will have peace,’ he said, now in a clear voice, ‘we
will have peace, when you and all your works have perished – and
the works of your dark master to whom you would deliver us. You
are a liar, Saruman, and a corrupter of men’s hearts. You hold out
your hand to me, and I perceive only a ﬁnger of the claw of Mordor.
Cruel and cold! Even if your war on me was just – as it was not, for
were you ten times as wise you would have no right to rule me and
mine for your own proﬁt as you desired – even so, what will you say
of your torches in Westfold and the children that lie dead there? And
they hewed Háma’s body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he
was dead. When you hang from a gibbet at your window for the sport
of your own crows, I will have peace with you and Orthanc. So much
for the House of Eorl. A lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not
need to lick your ﬁngers. Turn elsewhither. But I fear your voice has
lost its charm.’
The Riders gazed up at Théoden like men startled out of a dream.
Harsh as an old raven’s their master’s voice sounded in their ears

THE VOICE OF SARUMAN

581

after the music of Saruman. But Saruman for a while was beside
himself with wrath. He leaned over the rail as if he would smite the
King with his staff. To some suddenly it seemed that they saw a
snake coiling itself to strike.
‘Gibbets and crows!’ he hissed, and they shuddered at the hideous
change. ‘Dotard! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where
brigands drink in the reek, and their brats roll on the ﬂoor among
the dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the
noose comes, slow in the drawing, tight and hard in the end. Hang
if you will!’ Now his voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself.
‘I know not why I have had the patience to speak to you. For I need
you not, nor your little band of gallopers, as swift to ﬂy as to advance,
Théoden Horsemaster. Long ago I offered you a state beyond your
merit and your wit. I have offered it again, so that those whom you
mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give me brag and
abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts!
‘But you, Gandalf ! For you at least I am grieved, feeling for your
shame. How comes it that you can endure such company? For you
are proud, Gandalf – and not without reason, having a noble mind
and eyes that look both deep and far. Even now will you not listen
to my counsel?’
Gandalf stirred, and looked up. ‘What have you to say that you
did not say at our last meeting?’ he asked. ‘Or, perhaps, you have
things to unsay?’
Saruman paused. ‘Unsay?’ he mused, as if puzzled. ‘Unsay? I
endeavoured to advise you for your own good, but you scarcely
listened. You are proud and do not love advice, having indeed a
store of your own wisdom. But on that occasion you erred, I think,
misconstruing my intentions wilfully. I fear that in my eagerness to
persuade you, I lost patience. And indeed I regret it. For I bore you
no ill-will; and even now I bear none, though you return to me in
the company of the violent and the ignorant. How should I? Are we
not both members of a high and ancient order, most excellent in
Middle-earth? Our friendship would proﬁt us both alike. Much we
could still accomplish together, to heal the disorders of the world.
Let us understand one another, and dismiss from thought these lesser
folk! Let them wait on our decisions! For the common good I am
willing to redress the past, and to receive you. Will you not consult
with me? Will you not come up?’
So great was the power that Saruman exerted in this last effort
that none that stood within hearing were unmoved. But now the spell
was wholly different. They heard the gentle remonstrance of a kindly
king with an erring but much-loved minister. But they were shut out,
listening at a door to words not meant for them: ill-mannered children

582

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

or stupid servants overhearing the elusive discourse of their elders,
and wondering how it would affect their lot. Of loftier mould these
two were made: reverend and wise. It was inevitable that they should
make alliance. Gandalf would ascend into the tower, to discuss deep
things beyond their comprehension in the high chambers of Orthanc.
The door would be closed, and they would be left outside, dismissed
to await allotted work or punishment. Even in the mind of Théoden
the thought took shape, like a shadow of doubt: ‘He will betray us;
he will go – we shall be lost.’
Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke.
‘Saruman, Saruman!’ said Gandalf still laughing. ‘Saruman, you
missed your path in life. You should have been the king’s jester and
earned your bread, and stripes too, by mimicking his counsellors. Ah
me!’ he paused, getting the better of his mirth. ‘Understand one
another? I fear I am beyond your comprehension. But you, Saruman,
I understand now too well. I keep a clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than you suppose. When last I visited you, you
were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, the guest
who has escaped from the roof, will think twice before he comes back
in by the door. Nay, I do not think I will come up. But listen,
Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has
proved less strong than your hope and fancy made it. So may other
things in which you still have trust. Would it not be well to leave it
for a while? To turn to new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman!
Will you not come down?’
A shadow passed over Saruman’s face; then it went deathly white.
Before he could conceal it, they saw through the mask the anguish
of a mind in doubt, loathing to stay and dreading to leave its refuge.
For a second he hesitated, and no one breathed. Then he spoke,
and his voice was shrill and cold. Pride and hate were conquering
him.
‘Will I come down?’ he mocked. ‘Does an unarmed man come
down to speak with robbers out of doors? I can hear you well enough
here. I am no fool, and I do not trust you, Gandalf. They do not
stand openly on my stairs, but I know where the wild wood-demons
are lurking, at your command.’
‘The treacherous are ever distrustful,’ answered Gandalf wearily.
‘But you need not fear for your skin. I do not wish to kill you, or
hurt you, as you would know, if you really understood me. And I
have the power to protect you. I am giving you a last chance. You
can leave Orthanc, free – if you choose.’
‘That sounds well,’ sneered Saruman. ‘Very much in the manner
of Gandalf the Grey: so condescending, and so very kind. I do not
doubt that you would ﬁnd Orthanc commodious, and my departure

THE VOICE OF SARUMAN

583

convenient. But why should I wish to leave? And what do you mean
by ‘‘free’’? There are conditions, I presume?’
‘Reasons for leaving you can see from your windows,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘Others will occur to your thought. Your servants are
destroyed and scattered; your neighbours you have made your
enemies; and you have cheated your new master, or tried to do so.
When his eye turns hither, it will be the red eye of wrath. But when
I say ‘‘free’’, I mean ‘‘free’’: free from bond, of chain or command:
to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if you desire.
But you will ﬁrst surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your staff.
They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later, if you
merit them.’
Saruman’s face grew livid, twisted with rage, and a red light was
kindled in his eyes. He laughed wildly. ‘Later!’ he cried, and his
voice rose to a scream. ‘Later! Yes, when you also have the Keys of
Barad-dûr itself, I suppose; and the crowns of seven kings, and the
rods of the Five Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair of boots
many sizes larger than those that you wear now. A modest plan.
Hardly one in which my help is needed! I have other things to do.
Do not be a fool. If you wish to treat with me, while you have a
chance, go away, and come back when you are sober! And leave
behind these cut-throats and small rag-tag that dangle at your tail!
Good day!’ He turned and left the balcony.
‘Come back, Saruman!’ said Gandalf in a commanding voice. To
the amazement of the others, Saruman turned again, and as if dragged
against his will, he came slowly back to the iron rail, leaning on it,
breathing hard. His face was lined and shrunken. His hand clutched
his heavy black staff like a claw.
‘I did not give you leave to go,’ said Gandalf sternly. ‘I have not
ﬁnished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You
might still have turned away from folly and evil, and have been of
service. But you choose to stay and gnaw the ends of your old plots.
Stay then! But I warn you, you will not easily come out again. Not
unless the dark hands of the East stretch out to take you. Saruman!’
he cried, and his voice grew in power and authority. ‘Behold, I am
not Gandalf the Grey, whom you betrayed. I am Gandalf the White,
who has returned from death. You have no colour now, and I cast
you from the order and from the Council.’
He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in a clear cold voice.
‘Saruman, your staff is broken.’ There was a crack, and the staff split
asunder in Saruman’s hand, and the head of it fell down at Gandalf ’s
feet. ‘Go!’ said Gandalf. With a cry Saruman fell back and crawled
away. At that moment a heavy shining thing came hurtling down
from above. It glanced off the iron rail, even as Saruman left it, and

584

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

passing close to Gandalf ’s head, it smote the stair on which he stood.
The rail rang and snapped. The stair cracked and splintered in glittering sparks. But the ball was unharmed: it rolled on down the steps,
a globe of crystal, dark, but glowing with a heart of ﬁre. As it bounded
away towards a pool Pippin ran after it and picked it up.
´
‘The murderous rogue!’ cried Eomer.
But Gandalf was unmoved.
‘No, that was not thrown by Saruman,’ he said; ‘nor even at his
bidding, I think. It came from a window far above. A parting shot
from Master Wormtongue, I fancy, but ill aimed.’
‘The aim was poor, maybe, because he could not make up his
mind which he hated more, you or Saruman,’ said Aragorn.
‘That may be so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Small comfort will those two
have in their companionship: they will gnaw one another with words.
But the punishment is just. If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc
alive, it will be more than he deserves.
‘Here, my lad, I’ll take that! I did not ask you to handle it,’ he
cried, turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slowly,
as if he were bearing a great weight. He went down to meet him and
hastily took the dark globe from the hobbit, wrapping it in the folds
of his cloak. ‘I will take care of this,’ he said. ‘It is not a thing, I
guess, that Saruman would have chosen to cast away.’
‘But he may have other things to cast,’ said Gimli. ‘If that is the
end of the debate, let us go out of stone’s throw, at least!’
‘It is the end,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us go.’
They turned their backs on the doors of Orthanc, and went down.
The riders hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The spell
of Saruman was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl
away, dismissed.
‘Well, that is done,’ said Gandalf. ‘Now I must ﬁnd Treebeard
and tell him how things have gone.’
‘He will have guessed, surely?’ said Merry. ‘Were they likely to
end any other way?’
‘Not likely,’ answered Gandalf, ‘though they came to the balance
of a hair. But I had reasons for trying; some merciful and some less
so. First Saruman was shown that the power of his voice was waning.
He cannot be both tyrant and counsellor. When the plot is ripe it
remains no longer secret. Yet he fell into the trap, and tried to deal
with his victims piece-meal, while others listened. Then I gave him
a last choice and a fair one: to renounce both Mordor and his private
schemes, and make amends by helping us in our need. He knows
our need, none better. Great service he could have rendered. But he
has chosen to withhold it, and keep the power of Orthanc. He will
not serve, only command. He lives now in terror of the shadow of

THE VOICE OF SARUMAN

585

Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding the storm. Unhappy fool!
He will be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms
to Isengard. We cannot destroy Orthanc from without, but Sauron
– who knows what he can do?’
‘And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do to him?’
asked Pippin.
‘I? Nothing!’ said Gandalf. ‘I will do nothing to him. I do not wish
for mastery. What will become of him? I cannot say. I grieve that so
much that was good now festers in the tower. Still for us things have
not gone badly. Strange are the turns of fortune! Often does hatred
hurt itself ! I guess that, even if we had entered in, we could have
found few treasures in Orthanc more precious than the thing which
Wormtongue threw down at us.’
A shrill shriek, suddenly cut off, came from an open window high
above.
‘It seems that Saruman thinks so too,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us leave
them!’
They returned now to the ruins of the gate. Hardly had they passed
out under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled
stones where they had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came
striding up. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas gazed at them in wonder.
‘Here are three of my companions, Treebeard,’ said Gandalf. ‘I
have spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.’ He named
them one by one.
The Old Ent looked at them long and searchingly, and spoke to
them in turn. Last he turned to Legolas. ‘So you have come all the
way from Mirkwood, my good Elf ? A very great forest it used to be!’
‘And still is,’ said Legolas. ‘But not so great that we who dwell
there ever tire of seeing new trees. I should dearly love to journey in
Fangorn’s Wood. I scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and I did
not wish to turn back.’
Treebeard’s eyes gleamed with pleasure. ‘I hope you may have
your wish, ere the hills be much older,’ he said.
‘I will come, if I have the fortune,’ said Legolas. ‘I have made a
bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will visit Fangorn
together – by your leave.’
‘Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,’ said Treebeard.
‘The friend I speak of is not an Elf,’ said Legolas; ‘I mean Gimli,
Glóin’s son here.’ Gimli bowed low, and the axe slipped from his
belt and clattered on the ground.
‘Hoom, hm! Ah now,’ said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him.
‘A dwarf and an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good will to Elves; but
you ask much. This is a strange friendship!’

586

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Strange it may seem,’ said Legolas; ‘but while Gimli lives I shall
not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but for orc-necks,
O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn’s Wood. Forty-two he hewed in the
battle.’
‘Hoo! Come now!’ said Treebeard. ‘That is a better story! Well,
well, things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet
them. But now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end,
yet Gandalf says you must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark
is eager for his own house.’
‘Yes, we must go, and go now,’ said Gandalf. ‘I fear that I must
take your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough
without them.’
‘Maybe I shall,’ said Treebeard. ‘But I shall miss them. We have
become friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting hasty
– growing backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there, they are the
ﬁrst new thing under Sun or Moon that I have seen for many a long,
long day. I shall not forget them. I have put their names into the
Long List. Ents will remember it.
Ents the earthborn, old as mountains,
the wide-walkers, water drinking;
and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children,
the laughing-folk, the little people,
they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you
well! But if you hear news up in your pleasant land, in the Shire,
send me word! You know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives.
Come yourselves if you can!’
‘We will!’ said Merry and Pippin together, and they turned away
hastily. Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking
his head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.
‘So Saruman would not leave?’ he said. ‘I did not think he would.
His heart is as rotten as a black Huorn’s. Still, if I were overcome
and all my trees destroyed, I would not come while I had one dark
hole left to hide in.’
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you have not plotted to cover all the
world with your trees and choke all other living things. But there it
is, Saruman remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs
as he can. He has the Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed
to escape.’
‘Indeed no! Ents will see to that,’ said Treebeard. ‘Saruman shall
not set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over
him.’
‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is what I hoped. Now I can go and

THE VOICE OF SARUMAN

587

turn to other matters with one care the less. But you must be wary.
The waters have gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels
round the tower, I fear. I do not doubt that there were deep ways
delved under Orthanc, and that Saruman hopes to go and come
unmarked, before long. If you will undertake the labour, I beg you
to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard remains a
standing pool, or you discover the outlets. When all the underground
places are drowned, and the outlets blocked, then Saruman must
stay upstairs and look out of the windows.’
‘Leave it to the Ents!’ said Treebeard. ‘We shall search the valley
from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees are coming
back to live here, old trees, wild trees. The Watchwood we will call
it. Not a squirrel will go here, but I shall know of it. Leave it to Ents!
Until seven times the years in which he tormented us have passed,
we shall not tire of watching him.’

Chapter 11
T H E P A L A N T I´ R
The sun was sinking behind the long western arm of the mountains
when Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set
out again from Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of the king’s men went on ahead, riding
swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down into the valley. The others
followed at an easy pace.
Ents in a solemn row stood like statues at the gate, with their long
arms uplifted, but they made no sound. Merry and Pippin looked back,
when they had passed some way down the winding road. Sunlight was
still shining in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey
ruins falling into darkness. Treebeard stood alone there now, like the
distant stump of an old tree: the hobbits thought of their ﬁrst meeting,
upon the sunny ledge far away on the borders of Fangorn.
They came to the pillar of the White Hand. The pillar was still
standing, but the graven hand had been thrown down and broken
into small pieces. Right in the middle of the road the long foreﬁnger
lay, white in the dusk, its red nail darkening to black.
‘The Ents pay attention to every detail!’ said Gandalf.
They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley.
‘Are we riding far tonight, Gandalf ?’ asked Merry after a while. ‘I
don’t know how you feel with small rag-tag dangling behind you; but
the rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.’
‘So you heard that?’ said Gandalf. ‘Don’t let it rankle! Be thankful
no longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it is
any comfort to your pride, I should say that, at the moment, you
and Pippin are more in his thoughts than all the rest of us. Who
you are; how you came there, and why; what you know; whether you
were captured, and if so, how you escaped when all the Orcs perished
– it is with those little riddles that the great mind of Saruman is
troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if you feel
honoured by his concern.’
‘Thank you!’ said Merry. ‘But it is a greater honour to dangle at
your tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance
of putting a question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?’
Gandalf laughed. ‘A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards
should have a hobbit or two in their care – to teach them the meaning
of the word, and to correct them. I beg your pardon. But I have

T H E P A L A N T Í R

589

given thought even to these simple matters. We will ride for a few
hours, gently, until we come to the end of the valley. Tomorrow we
must ride faster.
‘When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to
the king’s house at Edoras over the plains, a ride of some days. But
we have taken thought and changed the plan. Messengers have gone
ahead to Helm’s Deep, to warn them that the king is returning
tomorrow. He will ride from there with many men to Dunharrow by
paths among the hills. From now on no more than two or three
together are to go openly over the land, by day or night, when it can
be avoided.’
‘Nothing or a double helping is your way!’ said Merry. ‘I am afraid
I was not looking beyond tonight’s bed. Where and what are Helm’s
Deep and all the rest of it? I don’t know anything about this country.’
‘Then you’d best learn something, if you wish to understand what
is happening. But not just now, and not from me: I have too many
pressing things to think about.’
‘All right, I’ll tackle Strider by the camp-ﬁre: he’s less testy. But
why all this secrecy? I thought we’d won the battle!’
‘Yes, we have won, but only the ﬁrst victory, and that in itself
increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and
Mordor, which I have not yet fathomed. How they exchanged news
I am not sure; but they did so. The Eye of Barad-dûr will be looking
impatiently towards the Wizard’s Vale, I think; and towards Rohan.
The less it sees the better.’
The road passed slowly, winding down the valley. Now further,
and now nearer Isen ﬂowed in its stony bed. Night came down from
the mountains. All the mists were gone. A chill wind blew. The moon,
now waxing round, ﬁlled the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen. The
shoulders of the mountain to their right sloped down to bare hills.
The wide plains opened grey before them.
At last they halted. Then they turned aside, leaving the highway
and taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going westward a mile or
so they came to a dale. It opened southward, leaning back into the
slope of round Dol Baran, the last hill of the northern ranges,
greenfooted, crowned with heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy
with last year’s bracken, among which the tight-curled fronds of
spring were just thrusting through the sweet-scented earth.
Thornbushes grew thick upon the low banks, and under them they
made their camp, two hours or so before the middle of the night.
They lit a ﬁre in a hollow, down among the roots of a spreading
hawthorn, tall as a tree, writhen with age, but hale in every limb.
Buds were swelling at each twig’s tip.

590

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Guards were set, two at a watch. The rest, after they had supped,
wrapped themselves in a cloak and blanket and slept. The hobbits
lay in a corner by themselves upon a pile of old bracken. Merry
was sleepy, but Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken
cracked and rustled, as he twisted and turned.
‘What’s the matter?’ asked Merry. ‘Are you lying on an ant-hill?’
‘No,’ said Pippin, ‘but I’m not comfortable. I wonder how long
it is since I slept in a bed?’
Merry yawned. ‘Work it out on your ﬁngers!’ he said. ‘But you
must know how long it is since we left Lórien.’
‘Oh, that!’ said Pippin. ‘I mean a real bed in a bedroom.’
‘Well, Rivendell then,’ said Merry. ‘But I could sleep anywhere
tonight.’
‘You had the luck, Merry,’ said Pippin softly, after a pause. ‘You
were riding with Gandalf.’
‘Well, what of it?’
‘Did you get any news, any information out of him?’
‘Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most
of it; you were close by, and we were talking no secrets. But you can
go with him tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him –
and if he’ll have you.’
‘Can I? Good! But he’s close, isn’t he? Not changed at all.’
‘Oh yes, he is!’ said Merry, waking up a little, and beginning
to wonder what was bothering his companion. ‘He has grown, or
something. He can be both kinder and more alarming, merrier and
more solemn than before, I think. He has changed; but we have not
had a chance to see how much, yet. But think of the last part of that
business with Saruman! Remember Saruman was once Gandalf ’s
superior: head of the Council, whatever that may be exactly. He was
Saruman the White. Gandalf is the White now. Saruman came when
he was told, and his rod was taken; and then he was just told to go,
and he went!’
‘Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he’s closer than ever
that’s all,’ Pippin argued. ‘That—glass ball, now. He seemed mighty
pleased with it. He knows or guesses something about it. But does
he tell us what? No, not a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved it
from rolling into a pool. Here, I’ll take that, my lad – that’s all. I
wonder what it is? It felt so very heavy.’ Pippin’s voice fell very low,
as if he was talking to himself.
‘Hullo!’ said Merry. ‘So that’s what is bothering you? Now, Pippin
my lad, don’t forget Gildor’s saying – the one Sam used to quote:
Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to
anger.’
‘But our whole life for months has been one long meddling in the

T H E P A L A N T Í R

591

affairs of Wizards,’ said Pippin. ‘I should like a bit of information as
well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.’
‘Go to sleep!’ said Merry. ‘You’ll get information enough, sooner
or later. My dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a Brandybuck for inquisitiveness; but is this the time, I ask you?’
‘All right! What’s the harm in my telling you what I should like:
a look at that stone? I know I can’t have it, with old Gandalf sitting
on it, like a hen on an egg. But it doesn’t help much to get no more
from you than a you-can’t-have-it so-go-to-sleep!’
‘Well, what else could I say?’ said Merry. ‘I’m sorry, Pippin, but
you really must wait till the morning. I’ll be as curious as you like
after breakfast, and I’ll help in any way I can at wizard-wheedling.
But I can’t keep awake any longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split
at the ears. Good night!’
Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away;
and it was not encouraged by the sound of Merry breathing softly,
asleep in a few minutes after saying good night. The thought of the
dark globe seemed to grow stronger as all grew quiet. Pippin felt
again its weight in his hands, and saw again the mysterious red depths
into which he had looked for a moment. He tossed and turned and
tried to think of something else.
At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked round.
It was chilly, and he wrapped his cloak about him. The moon was
shining cold and white, down into the dell, and the shadows of the
bushes were black. All about lay sleeping shapes. The two guards
were not in view: they were up on the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the
bracken. Driven by some impulse that he did not understand, Pippin
walked softly to where Gandalf lay. He looked down at him. The
wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there was a
glitter of eyes under his long lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily. But
Gandalf made no sign; and drawn forward once more, half against
his will, the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard’s head.
He was rolled in a blanket, with his cloak spread over the top; and
close beside him, between his right side and his bent arm, there was
a hummock, something round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand
seemed only just to have slipped off it to the ground.
Hardly breathing, Pippin crept nearer, foot by foot. At last he
knelt down. Then he put his hands out stealthily, and slowly lifted
the lump up: it did not seem quite so heavy as he had expected.
‘Only some bundle of oddments, perhaps, after all,’ he thought with
a strange sense of relief; but he did not put the bundle down again.
He stood for a moment clasping it. Then an idea came into his mind.
He tiptoed away, found a large stone, and came back.

592

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and
kneeling down, laid it back by the wizard’s hand. Then at last he
looked at the thing that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth
globe of crystal, now dark and dead, lying bare before his knees.
Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in his own cloak, and half turned
to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf moved in his sleep,
and muttered some words: they seemed to be in a strange tongue;
his hand groped out and clasped the wrapped stone, then he sighed
and did not move again.
‘You idiotic fool!’ Pippin muttered to himself. ‘You’re going to
get yourself into frightful trouble. Put it back quick!’ But he found
now that his knees quaked, and he did not dare to go near enough
to the wizard to reach the bundle. ‘I’ll never get it back now without
waking him,’ he thought, ‘not till I’m a bit calmer. So I may as well
have a look ﬁrst. Not just here though!’ He stole away, and sat down
on a green hillock not far from his bed. The moon looked in over
the edge of the dell.
Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball between them.
He bent low over it, looking like a greedy child stooping over a bowl
of food, in a corner away from others. He drew his cloak aside and
gazed at it. The air seemed still and tense about him. At ﬁrst the
globe was dark, black as jet, with the moonlight gleaming on its
surface. Then there came a faint glow and stir in the heart of it, and
it held his eyes, so that now he could not look away. Soon all the
inside seemed on ﬁre; the ball was spinning, or the lights within were
revolving. Suddenly the lights went out. He gave a gasp and struggled;
but he remained bent, clasping the ball with both hands. Closer and
closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips moved soundlessly for
a while. Then with a strangled cry he fell back and lay still.
The cry was piercing. The guards leapt down from the banks. All
the camp was soon astir.
‘So this is the thief !’ said Gandalf. Hastily he cast his cloak over
the globe where it lay. ‘But you, Pippin! This is a grievous turn to
things!’ He knelt by Pippin’s body: the hobbit was lying on his back,
rigid, with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky. ‘The devilry! What
mischief has he done – to himself, and to all of us?’ The wizard’s
face was drawn and haggard.
He took Pippin’s hand and bent over his face, listening for his
breath; then he laid his hands on his brow. The hobbit shuddered.
His eyes closed. He cried out; and sat up, staring in bewilderment
at all the faces round him, pale in the moonlight.
‘It is not for you, Saruman!’ he cried in a shrill and toneless voice,
shrinking away from Gandalf. ‘I will send for it at once. Do you

T H E P A L A N T Í R

593

understand? Say just that!’ Then he struggled to get up and escape,
but Gandalf held him gently and ﬁrmly.
‘Peregrin Took!’ he said. ‘Come back!’
The hobbit relaxed and fell back, clinging to the wizard’s hand.
‘Gandalf !’ he cried. ‘Gandalf ! Forgive me!’
‘Forgive you?’ said the wizard. ‘Tell me ﬁrst what you have done!’
‘I, I took the ball and looked at it,’ stammered Pippin; ‘and I saw
things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I couldn’t.
And then he came and questioned me; and he looked at me, and,
and, that is all I remember.’
‘That won’t do,’ said Gandalf sternly. ‘What did you see, and
what did you say?’
Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared
at him in silence, except Merry who turned away. But Gandalf ’s face
was still hard. ‘Speak!’ he said.
In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words
grew clearer and stronger. ‘I saw a dark sky, and tall battlements,’
he said. ‘And tiny stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet
hard and clear. Then the stars went in and out – they were cut off
by things with wings. Very big, I think, really; but in the glass they
looked like bats wheeling round the tower. I thought there were nine
of them. One began to ﬂy straight towards me, getting bigger and
bigger. It had a horrible – no, no! I can’t say.
‘I tried to get away, because I thought it would ﬂy out; but when
it had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then he came. He did not
speak so that I could hear words. He just looked, and I understood.
‘ ‘‘So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for
so long?’’
‘I did not answer. He said: ‘‘Who are you?’’ I still did not answer,
but it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: ‘‘A hobbit.’’
‘Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It
was cruel. It was like being stabbed with knives. I struggled. But he
said: ‘‘Wait a moment! We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman that
this dainty is not for him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand?
Say just that!’’
‘Then he gloated over me. I felt I was falling to pieces. No, no! I
can’t say any more. I don’t remember anything else.’
‘Look at me!’ said Gandalf.
Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze
for a moment in silence. Then his face grew gentler, and the shadow
of a smile appeared. He laid his hand softly on Pippin’s head.
‘All right!’ he said. ‘Say no more! You have taken no harm. There
is no lie in your eyes, as I feared. But he did not speak long with
you. A fool, but an honest fool, you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser

594

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

ones might have done worse in such a pass. But mark this! You have
been saved, and all your friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is
called. You cannot count on it a second time. If he had questioned
you, then and there, almost certainly you would have told all that
you know, to the ruin of us all. But he was too eager. He did not
want information only: he wanted you, quickly, so that he could deal
with you in the Dark Tower, slowly. Don’t shudder! If you will
meddle in the affairs of Wizards, you must be prepared to think of
such things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not
turned out as evilly as they might.’
He lifted Pippin gently and carried him back to his bed. Merry
followed, and sat down beside him. ‘Lie there and rest, if you can,
Pippin!’ said Gandalf. ‘Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms
again, tell me of it! Such things can be cured. But anyway, my dear
hobbit, don’t put a lump of rock under my elbow again! Now, I will
leave you two together for a while.’
With that Gandalf returned to the others, who were still standing
by the Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. ‘Peril comes in the night
when least expected,’ he said. ‘We have had a narrow escape!’
‘How is the hobbit, Pippin?’ asked Aragorn.
‘I think all will be well now,’ answered Gandalf. ‘He was not held
long, and hobbits have an amazing power of recovery. The memory,
or the horror of it, will probably fade quickly. Too quickly, perhaps.
Will you, Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.’
‘Dangerous indeed, but not to all,’ said Aragorn. ‘There is one
who may claim it by right. For this assuredly is the palantı́r of Orthanc
from the treasury of Elendil, set here by the Kings of Gondor. Now
my hour draws near. I will take it.’
Gandalf looked at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the others,
he lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it.
‘Receive it, lord!’ he said: ‘in earnest of other things that shall be
given back. But if I may counsel you in the use of your own, do not
use it – yet! Be wary!’
‘When have I been hasty or unwary, who have waited and prepared
for so many long years?’ said Aragorn.
‘Never yet. Do not then stumble at the end of the road,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘But at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others
that stand here! The hobbit, Peregrin, above all should not know
where it is bestowed. The evil ﬁt may come on him again. For alas!
he has handled it and looked in it, as should never have happened.
He ought never to have touched it in Isengard, and there I should
have been quicker. But my mind was bent on Saruman, and I did

T H E P A L A N T Í R

595

not at once guess the nature of the Stone. Then I was weary, and as
I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!’
‘Yes, there can be no doubt,’ said Aragorn. ‘At last we know the
link between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is
explained.’
‘Strange powers have our enemies, and strange weaknesses!’ said
Théoden. ‘But it has long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar.’
‘That many times is seen,’ said Gandalf. ‘But at this time we have
been strangely fortunate. Maybe, I have been saved by this hobbit
from a grave blunder. I had considered whether or not to probe this
Stone myself to ﬁnd its uses. Had I done so, I should have been
revealed to him myself. I am not ready for such a trial, if indeed I
shall ever be so. But even if I found the power to withdraw myself,
it would be disastrous for him to see me, yet – until the hour comes
when secrecy will avail no longer.’
‘That hour is now come, I think,’ said Aragorn.
‘Not yet,’ said Gandalf. ‘There remains a short while of doubt,
which we must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that the Stone
was in Orthanc – why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit
was captive there, driven to look in the glass for his torment by
Saruman. That dark mind will be ﬁlled now with the voice and face
of the hobbit and with expectation: it may take some time before he
learns his error. We must snatch that time. We have been too
leisurely. We must move. The neighbourhood of Isengard is no place
now to linger in. I will ride ahead at once with Peregrin Took. It will
be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.’
´
‘I will keep Eomer
and ten Riders,’ said the king. ‘They shall ride
with me at early day. The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon
as they have a mind.’
‘As you will,’ said Gandalf. ‘But make all the speed you may to
the cover of the hills, to Helm’s Deep!’
At that moment a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight
seemed to be suddenly cut off. Several of the Riders cried out, and
crouched, holding their arms above their heads, as if to ward off a blow
from above: a blind fear and a deadly cold fell on them. Cowering they
looked up. A vast winged shape passed over the moon like a black cloud.
It wheeled and went north, ﬂying at a speed greater than any wind of
Middle-earth. The stars fainted before it. It was gone.
They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms
out and downwards, stiff, his hands clenched.
‘Nazgûl!’ he cried. ‘The messenger of Mordor. The storm is
coming. The Nazgûl have crossed the River! Ride, ride! Wait not for
the dawn! Let not the swift wait for the slow! Ride!’

596

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He sprang away, calling Shadowfax as he ran. Aragorn followed
him. Going to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. ‘You shall
come with me this time,’ he said. ‘Shadowfax shall show you his
paces.’ Then he ran to the place where he had slept. Shadowfax stood
there already. Slinging the small bag which was all his luggage across
his shoulders, the wizard leapt upon the horse’s back. Aragorn lifted
Pippin and set him in Gandalf ’s arms, wrapped in cloak and blanket.
‘Farewell! Follow fast!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Away, Shadowfax!’
The great horse tossed his head. His ﬂowing tail ﬂicked in the
moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the earth, and was gone
like the north wind from the mountains.
‘A beautiful, restful night!’ said Merry to Aragorn. ‘Some folk have
wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride
with Gandalf – and there he goes! Instead of being turned into a
stone himself to stand here for ever as a warning.’
‘If you had been the ﬁrst to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not he,
how would it be now?’ said Aragorn. ‘You might have done worse.
Who can say? But now it is your luck to come with me, I fear. At
once. Go and get ready, and bring anything that Pippin left behind.
Make haste!’
Over the plains Shadowfax was ﬂying, needing no urging and no
guidance. Less than an hour had passed, and they had reached the
Fords of Isen and crossed them. The Mound of the Riders and its
cold spears lay grey behind them.
Pippin was recovering. He was warm, but the wind in his face was
keen and refreshing. He was with Gandalf. The horror of the Stone
and of the hideous shadow over the moon was fading, things left
behind in the mists of the mountains or in a passing dream. He drew
a deep breath.
‘I did not know you rode bare-back, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘You
haven’t a saddle or a bridle!’
‘I do not ride elf-fashion, except on Shadowfax,’ said Gandalf.
‘But Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax:
he is willing to carry you – or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It
is then his business to see that you remain on his back, unless you
jump off into the air.’
‘How fast is he going?’ asked Pippin. ‘Fast by the wind, but very
smooth. And how light his footfalls are!’
‘He is running now as fast as the swiftest horse could gallop,’
answered Gandalf; ‘but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a
little here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see
how the White Mountains are drawing near under the stars! Yonder

T H E P A L A N T Í R

597

are the Thrihyrne peaks like black spears. It will not be long before
we reach the branching roads and come to the Deeping-coomb, where
the battle was fought two nights ago.’
Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly
to himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues, as
the miles ran under them. At last the wizard passed into a song of
which the hobbit caught the words: a few lines came clear to his ears
through the rushing of the wind:
Tall ships and tall kings
Three times three,
What brought they from the foundered land
Over the ﬂowing sea?
Seven stars and seven stones
And one white tree.
‘What are you saying, Gandalf ?’ asked Pippin.
‘I was just running over some of the Rhymes of Lore in my mind,’
answered the wizard. ‘Hobbits, I suppose, have forgotten them, even
those that they ever knew.’
‘No, not all,’ said Pippin. ‘And we have many of our own, which
wouldn’t interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard this one. What
is it about – the seven stars and seven stones?’
‘About the palantı́ri of the Kings of Old,’ said Gandalf.
‘And what are they?’
‘The name meant that which looks far away. The Orthanc-stone
was one.’
‘Then it was not made, not made’ – Pippin hesitated – ‘by the
Enemy?’
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Nor by Saruman. It is beyond his art, and
beyond Sauron’s too. The palantı́ri came from beyond Westernesse,
from Eldamar. The Noldor made them. Fëanor himself, maybe,
wrought them, in days so long ago that the time cannot be measured
in years. But there is nothing that Sauron cannot turn to evil uses.
Alas for Saruman! It was his downfall, as I now perceive. Perilous to
us all are the devices of an art deeper than we possess ourselves. Yet
he must bear the blame. Fool! to keep it secret, for his own proﬁt.
No word did he ever speak of it to any of the Council. We had not
yet given thought to the fate of the palantı́ri of Gondor in its ruinous
wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even in Gondor they were
a secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only
in a rhyme of lore among the Dúnedain.’
‘What did the Men of old use them for?’ asked Pippin, delighted

598

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and astonished at getting answers to so many questions, and wondering how long it would last.
‘To see far off, and to converse in thought with one another,’ said
Gandalf. ‘In that way they long guarded and united the realm of
Gondor. They set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at Minas Ithil, and
at Orthanc in the ring of Isengard. The chief and master of these
was under the Dome of Stars at Osgiliath before its ruin. The three
others were far away in the North. In the house of Elrond it is told
that they were at Annúminas, and Amon Sûl, and Elendil’s Stone
was on the Tower Hills that look towards Mithlond in the Gulf of
Lune where the grey ships lie.
‘Each palantı́r replied to each, but all those in Gondor were ever
open to the view of Osgiliath. Now it appears that, as the rock of
Orthanc has withstood the storms of time, so there the palantı́r of
that tower has remained. But alone it could do nothing but see small
images of things far off and days remote. Very useful, no doubt, that
was to Saruman; yet it seems that he was not content. Further and
further abroad he gazed, until he cast his gaze upon Barad-dûr. Then
he was caught!
‘Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie,
buried, or drowned deep? But one at least Sauron must have obtained
and mastered to his purposes. I guess that it was the Ithil-stone, for
he took Minas Ithil long ago and turned it into an evil place: Minas
Morgul, it has become.
‘Easy it is now to guess how quickly the roving eye of Saruman
was trapped and held; and how ever since he has been persuaded
from afar, and daunted when persuasion would not serve. The biter
bit, the hawk under the eagle’s foot, the spider in a steel web! How
long, I wonder, has he been constrained to come often to his glass
for inspection and instruction, and the Orthanc-stone so bent towards
Barad-dûr that, if any save a will of adamant now looks into it, it
will bear his mind and sight swiftly thither? And how it draws one
to itself ! Have I not felt it? Even now my heart desires to test my
will upon it, to see if I could not wrench it from him and turn it
where I would – to look across the wide seas of water and of time to
Tirion the Fair, and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of
Fëanor at their work, while both the White Tree and the Golden
were in ﬂower!’ He sighed and fell silent.
‘I wish I had known all this before,’ said Pippin. ‘I had no notion
of what I was doing.’
‘Oh yes, you had,’ said Gandalf. ‘You knew you were behaving
wrongly and foolishly; and you told yourself so, though you did not
listen. I did not tell you all this before, because it is only by musing
on all that has happened that I have at last understood, even as we

T H E P A L A N T Í R

599

ride together. But if I had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened
your desire, or made it easier to resist. On the contrary! No, the
burned hand teaches best. After that advice about ﬁre goes to the
heart.’
‘It does,’ said Pippin. ‘If all the seven stones were laid out before
me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.’
‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is what I hoped.’
‘But I should like to know——’ Pippin began.
‘Mercy!’ cried Gandalf. ‘If the giving of information is to be the
cure of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my days in
answering you. What more do you want to know?’
‘The names of all the stars, and of all living things, and the whole
history of Middle-earth and Over-heaven and of the Sundering Seas,’
laughed Pippin. ‘Of course! What less? But I am not in a hurry
tonight. At the moment I was just wondering about the black shadow.
I heard you shout ‘‘messenger of Mordor’’. What was it? What could
it do at Isengard?’
‘It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgûl,’ said Gandalf. ‘It could
have taken you away to the Dark Tower.’
‘But it was not coming for me, was it?’ faltered Pippin. ‘I mean,
it didn’t know that I had . . .’
‘Of course not,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is two hundred leagues or more
in straight ﬂight from Barad-dûr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgûl
would take a few hours to ﬂy between them. But Saruman certainly
looked in the Stone since the orc-raid, and more of his secret thought,
I do not doubt, has been read than he intended. A messenger has
been sent to ﬁnd out what he is doing. And after what has happened
tonight another will come, I think, and swiftly. So Saruman will come
to the last pinch of the vice that he has put his hand in. He has no
captive to send. He has no Stone to see with, and cannot answer the
summons. Sauron will only believe that he is withholding the captive
and refusing to use the Stone. It will not help Saruman to tell the
truth to the messenger. For Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still
safe in Orthanc. So whether he will or no, he will appear a rebel. Yet
he rejected us, so as to avoid that very thing! What he will do in such
a plight, I cannot guess. He has power still, I think, while in Orthanc,
to resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He may try to trap
the Nazgûl, or at least to slay the thing on which it now rides the
air. In that case let Rohan look to its horses!
‘But I cannot tell how it will fall out, well or ill for us. It may be
that the counsels of the Enemy will be confused, or hindered by his
wrath with Saruman. It may be that he will learn that I was there
and stood upon the stairs of Orthanc – with hobbits at my tail. Or
that an heir of Elendil lives and stood beside me. If Wormtongue

600

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was not deceived by the armour of Rohan, he would remember
Aragorn and the title that he claimed. That is what I fear. And so
we ﬂy – not from danger but into greater danger. Every stride of
Shadowfax bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow, Peregrin Took.’
Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if a sudden
chill had struck him. Grey land passed under them.
‘See now!’ said Gandalf. ‘The Westfold dales are opening before
us. Here we come back to the eastward road. The dark shadow
yonder is the mouth of the Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond
and the Glittering Caves. Do not ask me about them. Ask Gimli, if
you meet again, and for the ﬁrst time you may get an answer longer
than you wish. You will not see the caves yourself, not on this journey.
Soon they will be far behind.’
‘I thought you were going to stop at Helm’s Deep!’ said Pippin.
‘Where are you going then?’
‘To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it.’
‘Oh! And how far is that?’
‘Leagues upon leagues,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Thrice as far as the
dwellings of King Théoden, and they are more than a hundred miles
east from here, as the messengers of Mordor ﬂy. Shadowfax must
run a longer road. Which will prove the swifter?
‘We shall ride now till daybreak, and that is some hours away.
Then even Shadowfax must rest, in some hollow of the hills: at
Edoras, I hope. Sleep, if you can! You may see the ﬁrst glimmer of
dawn upon the golden roof of the house of Eorl. And in three days
thence you shall see the purple shadow of Mount Mindolluin and
the walls of the tower of Denethor white in the morning.
‘Away now, Shadowfax! Run, greatheart, run as you have never
run before! Now we are come to the lands where you were foaled,
and every stone you know. Run now! Hope is in speed!’
Shadowfax tossed his head and cried aloud, as if a trumpet had
summoned him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire ﬂew from
his feet; night rushed over him.
As he fell slowly into sleep, Pippin had a strange feeling: he and
Gandalf were still as stone, seated upon the statue of a running horse,
while the world rolled away beneath his feet with a great noise of
wind.

´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME

615

‘But that would kill us, kill us,’ whimpered Gollum. ‘Cruel little
hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands and leave us, gollum,
gollum.’ Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat.
‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘If we kill him, we must kill him outright. But
we can’t do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no
harm.’
‘Oh hasn’t he!’ said Sam rubbing his shoulder. ‘Anyway he meant
to, and he means to, I’ll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, that’s his
plan.’
‘I daresay,’ said Frodo. ‘But what he means to do is another
matter.’ He paused for a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but
stopped whimpering. Sam stood glowering over him.
It seemed to Frodo then that he heard, quite plainly but far off,
voices out of the past:
What a pity Bilbo did not stab the vile creature, when he had a chance!
Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike
without need.
I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death.
Deserves death! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And
some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too
eager to deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety.
Even the wise cannot see all ends.
‘Very well,’ he answered aloud, lowering his sword. ‘But still I am
afraid. And yet, as you see, I will not touch the creature. For now
that I see him, I do pity him.’
Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one
who was not there. Gollum lifted his head.
‘Yess, wretched we are, precious,’ he whined. ‘Misery misery!
Hobbits won’t kill us, nice hobbits.’
‘No, we won’t,’ said Frodo. ‘But we won’t let you go, either.
You’re full of wickedness and mischief, Gollum. You will have to
come with us, that’s all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must
help us, if you can. One good turn deserves another.’
‘Yess, yes indeed,’ said Gollum sitting up. ‘Nice hobbits! We will
come with them. Find them safe paths in the dark, yes we will. And
where are they going in these cold hard lands, we wonders, yes we
wonders?’ He looked up at them, and a faint light of cunning and
eagerness ﬂickered for a second in his pale blinking eyes.
Sam scowled at him, and sucked his teeth; but he seemed to sense
that there was something odd about his master’s mood and that the
matter was beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo’s
reply.
Frodo looked straight into Gollum’s eyes which ﬂinched and

640

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

light of day, so near to this vast menace, Frodo quickly drew his frail
grey hood close upon his head, and stepped down into the dell. Then
he turned to Gollum.
‘Sméagol,’ he said, ‘I will trust you once more. Indeed it seems
that I must do so, and that it is my fate to receive help from you,
where I least looked for it, and your fate to help me whom you long
pursued with evil purpose. So far you have deserved well of me and
have kept your promise truly. Truly, I say and mean,’ he added with
a glance at Sam, ‘for twice now we have been in your power, and
you have done no harm to us. Nor have you tried to take from me
what you once sought. May the third time prove the best! But I warn
you, Sméagol, you are in danger.’
‘Yes, yes, master!’ said Gollum. ‘Dreadful danger! Sméagol’s
bones shake to think of it, but he doesn’t run away. He must help
nice master.’
‘I did not mean the danger that we all share,’ said Frodo. ‘I mean
a danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call
the Precious. Remember that! It will hold you to it; but it will seek
a way to twist it to your own undoing. Already you are being twisted.
You revealed yourself to me just now, foolishly. Give it back to Sméagol
you said. Do not say that again! Do not let that thought grow in you!
You will never get it back. But the desire of it may betray you to a
bitter end. You will never get it back. In the last need, Sméagol, I
should put on the Precious; and the Precious mastered you long ago.
If I, wearing it, were to command you, you would obey, even if it
were to leap from a precipice or to cast yourself into the ﬁre. And
such would be my command. So have a care, Sméagol!’
Sam looked at his master with approval, but also with surprise:
there was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not
known before. It had always been a notion of his that the kindness
of dear Mr. Frodo was of such a high degree that it must imply a
fair measure of blindness. Of course, he also ﬁrmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the wisest person in the world (with
the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and of Gandalf ). Gollum in
his own way, and with much more excuse as his acquaintance was
much briefer, may have made a similar mistake, confusing kindness
and blindness. At any rate this speech abashed and terriﬁed him. He
grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but nice
master.
Frodo waited patiently for a while, then he spoke again less sternly.
‘Come now, Gollum or Sméagol if you wish, tell me of this other
way, and show me, if you can, what hope there is in it, enough to
justify me in turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.’
But Gollum was in a pitiable state, and Frodo’s threat had quite

644

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Its name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful rumour. Aragorn
could perhaps have told them that name and its signiﬁcance; Gandalf
would have warned them. But they were alone, and Aragorn was far
away, and Gandalf stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with
Saruman, delayed by treason. Yet even as he spoke his last words to
Saruman, and the palantı́r crashed in ﬁre upon the steps of Orthanc,
his thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise, over the long leagues
his mind sought for them in hope and pity.
Maybe Frodo felt it, not knowing it, as he had upon Amon Hen,
even though he believed that Gandalf was gone, gone for ever into
the shadow in Moria far away. He sat upon the ground for a long
while, silent, his head bowed, striving to recall all that Gandalf had
said to him. But for this choice he could recall no counsel. Indeed
Gandalf ’s guidance had been taken from them too soon, too soon,
while the Dark Land was still very far away. How they should enter
it at the last Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could not say. Into
the stronghold of the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he had
once ventured. But into Mordor, to the Mountain of Fire and to
Barad-dûr, since the Dark Lord rose in power again, had he ever
journeyed there? Frodo did not think so. And here he was a little
halﬂing from the Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside,
expected to ﬁnd a way where the great ones could not go, or dared
not go. It was an evil fate. But he had taken it on himself in his own
sitting-room in the far-off spring of another year, so remote now that
it was like a chapter in a story of the world’s youth, when the Trees
of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This was an evil choice. Which
way should he choose? And if both led to terror and death, what
good lay in choice?
The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little grey hollow
where they lay, so near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence
that could be felt, as if it were a thick veil that cut them off from all
the world about them. Above them was a dome of pale sky barred
with ﬂeeting smoke, but it seemed high and far away, as if seen
through great deeps of air heavy with brooding thought.
Not even an eagle poised against the sun would have marked the
hobbits sitting there, under the weight of doom, silent, not moving,
shrouded in their thin grey cloaks. For a moment he might have
paused to consider Gollum, a tiny ﬁgure sprawling on the ground:
there perhaps lay the famished skeleton of some child of Men, its
ragged garment still clinging to it, its long arms and legs almost
bone-white and bone-thin: no ﬂesh worth a peck.
Frodo’s head was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back,
with hands behind his head, staring out of his hood at the empty sky.

THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED

647

‘That,’ said Sam, when he had ﬁnished reciting, ‘that’s a rhyme we
have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have
our tales too, and news out of the South, you know. In the old days
hobbits used to go on their travels now and again. Not that many
ever came back, and not that all they said was believed: news from
Bree, and not sure as Shiretalk, as the sayings go. But I’ve heard tales
of the big folk down away in the Sunlands. Swertings we call ’em in
our tales; and they ride on oliphaunts, ’tis said, when they ﬁght. They
put houses and towers on the oliphauntses backs and all, and the
oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another. So when you said
‘‘Men out of the South, all in red and gold,’’ I said ‘‘were there any
oliphaunts?’’ For if there was, I was going to take a look, risk or no.
But now I don’t suppose I’ll ever see an oliphaunt. Maybe there ain’t
no such a beast.’ He sighed.
‘No, no oliphaunts,’ said Gollum again. ‘Sméagol has not heard
of them. He does not want to see them. He does not want them to
be. Sméagol wants to go away from here and hide somewhere safer.
Sméagol wants master to go. Nice master, won’t he come with
Sméagol?’
Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst of all his cares when
Sam trotted out the old ﬁreside rhyme of Oliphaunt, and the laugh
had released him from hesitation. ‘I wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a white one at their head,’ he said. ‘Then
we’d break a way into this evil land, perhaps. But we’ve not; just our
own tired legs, that’s all. Well, Sméagol, the third turn may turn the
best. I will come with you.’
‘Good master, wise master, nice master!’ cried Gollum in delight,
patting Frodo’s knees. ‘Good master! Then rest now, nice hobbits,
under the shadow of the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie
quiet, till the Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft
and quick as shadows we must be!’

670

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

is still preserved of ancient lore among the Rulers of the city that is
not spread abroad. We of my house are not of the line of Elendil,
though the blood of Númenor is in us. For we reckon back our line
to Mardil, the good steward, who ruled in the king’s stead when he
went away to war. And that was King Eärnur, last of the line of
Anárion, and childless, and he came never back. And the stewards
have governed the city since that day, though it was many generations
of Men ago.
‘And this I remember of Boromir as a boy, when we together
learned the tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always
it displeased him that his father was not king. ‘‘How many hundreds
of years needs it to make a steward a king, if the king returns not?’’
he asked. ‘‘Few years, maybe, in other places of less royalty,’’ my
father answered. ‘‘In Gondor ten thousand years would not sufﬁce.’’
Alas! poor Boromir. Does that not tell you something of him?’
‘It does,’ said Frodo. ‘Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.’
‘I doubt it not,’ said Faramir. ‘If he were satisﬁed of Aragorn’s
claim, as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch had
not yet come. They had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become
rivals in her wars.
‘But I stray. We in the house of Denethor know much ancient
lore by long tradition, and there are moreover in our treasuries many
things preserved: books and tablets writ on withered parchments,
yea, and on stone, and on leaves of silver and of gold, in divers
characters. Some none can now read; and for the rest, few ever unlock
them. I can read a little in them, for I have had teaching. It was these
records that brought the Grey Pilgrim to us. I ﬁrst saw him when I
was a child, and he has been twice or thrice since then.’
‘The Grey Pilgrim?’ said Frodo. ‘Had he a name?’
‘Mithrandir we called him in elf-fashion,’ said Faramir, ‘and he
was content. Many are my names in many countries, he said. Mithrandir
among the Elves, Tharkûn to the Dwarves; Olórin I was in my youth in
the West that is forgotten, in the South Incánus, in the North Gandalf;
to the East I go not.’
‘Gandalf !’ said Frodo. ‘I thought it was he. Gandalf the Grey,
dearest of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in
Moria.’
‘Mithrandir was lost!’ said Faramir. ‘An evil fate seems to have
pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one of so
great wisdom, and of power – for many wonderful things he did
among us – could perish, and so much lore be taken from the world.
Are you sure of this, and that he did not just leave you and depart
where he would?’
‘Alas! yes,’ said Frodo. ‘I saw him fall into the abyss.’

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

671

‘I see that there is some great tale of dread in this,’ said Faramir,
‘which perhaps you may tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir
was, I now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the
deeds that are done in our time. Had he been among us to consult
concerning the hard words of our dream, he could have made them
clear to us without need of messenger. Yet, maybe, he would not
have done so, and the journey of Boromir was doomed. Mithrandir
never spoke to us of what was to be, nor did he reveal his purposes.
He got leave of Denethor, how I do not know, to look at the secrets
of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would teach
(and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would question us
above all else concerning the Great Battle that was fought upon
Dagorlad in the beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not
name was overthrown. And he was eager for stories of Isildur, though
of him we had less to tell; for nothing certain was ever known among
us of his end.’
Now Faramir’s voice sank to a whisper. ‘But this much I learned,
or guessed, and I have kept it ever secret in my heart since: that
Isildur took somewhat from the hand of the Unnamed, ere he went
away from Gondor, never to be seen among mortal men again. Here
I thought was the answer to Mithrandir’s questioning. But it seemed
then a matter that concerned only the seekers after ancient learning.
Nor when the riddling words of our dream were debated among us,
did I think of Isildur’s Bane as being this same thing. For Isildur was
ambushed and slain by orc-arrows, according to the only legend that
we knew, and Mithrandir had never told me more.
‘What in truth this Thing is I cannot yet guess; but some heirloom
of power and peril it must be. A fell weapon, perchance, devised by
the Dark Lord. If it were a thing that gave advantage in battle, I can
well believe that Boromir, the proud and fearless, often rash, ever
anxious for the victory of Minas Tirith (and his own glory therein),
might desire such a thing and be allured by it. Alas that ever he went
on that errand! I should have been chosen by my father and the
elders, but he put himself forward, as being the older and the hardier
(both true), and he would not be stayed.
‘But fear no more! I would not take this thing, if it lay by the
highway. Not were Minas Tirith falling in ruin and I alone could
save her, so, using the weapon of the Dark Lord for her good and
my glory. No, I do not wish for such triumphs, Frodo son of Drogo.’
‘Neither did the Council,’ said Frodo. ‘Nor do I. I would have
nothing to do with such matters.’
‘For myself,’ said Faramir, ‘I would see the White Tree in ﬂower
again in the courts of the kings, and the Silver Crown return, and
Minas Tirith in peace: Minas Anor again as of old, full of light, high

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

677

of blunting the edge of a noble hunger, or for fear of me, I do not
know. But it is not good to sleep too soon after meat, and that
following a fast. Let us talk a while. On your journey from Rivendell
there must have been many things to tell. And you, too, would perhaps wish to learn something of us and the lands where you now are.
Tell me of Boromir my brother, and of old Mithrandir, and of the
fair people of Lothlórien.’
Frodo no longer felt sleepy and he was willing to talk. But though
the food and wine had put him at his ease, he had not lost all his
caution. Sam was beaming and humming to himself, but when Frodo
spoke he was at ﬁrst content to listen, only occasionally venturing to
make an exclamation of agreement.
Frodo told many tales, yet always he steered the matter away from
the quest of the Company and from the Ring, enlarging rather on
the valiant part Boromir had played in all their adventures, with the
wolves of the wild, in the snows under Caradhras, and in the mines
of Moria where Gandalf fell. Faramir was most moved by the story
of the ﬁght on the bridge.
‘It must have irked Boromir to run from Orcs,’ he said, ‘or even
from the fell thing you name, the Balrog – even though he was the
last to leave.’
‘He was the last,’ said Frodo, ‘but Aragorn was forced to lead us.
He alone knew the way after Gandalf ’s fall. But had there not been
us lesser folk to care for, I do not think that either he or Boromir
would have ﬂed.’
‘Maybe, it would have been better had Boromir fallen there with
Mithrandir,’ said Faramir, ‘and not gone on to the fate that waited
above the falls of Rauros.’
‘Maybe. But tell me now of your own fortunes,’ said Frodo, turning the matter aside once again. ‘For I would learn more of Minas
Ithil and Osgiliath, and Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What hope
have you for that city in your long war?’
‘What hope have we?’ said Faramir. ‘It is long since we had any
hope. The sword of Elendil, if it returns indeed, may rekindle it, but
I do not think that it will do more than put off the evil day, unless
other help unlooked-for also comes, from Elves or Men. For the
Enemy increases and we decrease. We are a failing people, a springless
autumn.
‘The Men of Númenor were settled far and wide on the shores
and seaward regions of the Great Lands, but for the most part they
fell into evils and follies. Many became enamoured of the Darkness
and the black arts; some were given over wholly to idleness and ease,
and some fought among themselves, until they were conquered in
their weakness by the wild men.

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

679

Men of the Twilight, such as are the Rohirrim and their kin that
dwell still far in the North; and the Wild, the Men of Darkness.
‘Yet now, if the Rohirrim are grown in some ways more like to
us, enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too have become more like
to them, and can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are
become Middle Men, of the Twilight, but with memory of other
things. For as the Rohirrim do, we now love war and valour as things
good in themselves, both a sport and an end; and though we still
hold that a warrior should have more skills and knowledge than only
the craft of weapons and slaying, we esteem a warrior, nonetheless,
above men of other crafts. Such is the need of our days. So even was
my brother, Boromir: a man of prowess, and for that he was accounted
the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of
Minas Tirith has for long years been so hardy in toil, so onward into
battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.’ Faramir sighed
and fell silent for a while.
‘You don’t say much in all your tales about the Elves, sir,’ said
Sam, suddenly plucking up courage. He had noted that Faramir
seemed to refer to Elves with reverence, and this even more than his
courtesy, and his food and wine, had won Sam’s respect and quieted
his suspicions.
‘No indeed, Master Samwise,’ said Faramir, ‘for I am not learned
in Elven-lore. But there you touch upon another point in which we
have changed, declining from Númenor to Middle-earth. For as you
may know, if Mithrandir was your companion and you have spoken
with Elrond, the Edain, the Fathers of the Númenóreans, fought
beside the Elves in the ﬁrst wars, and were rewarded by the gift of
the kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight of Elvenhome. But
in Middle-earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days of
darkness, by the arts of the Enemy, and by the slow changes of time
in which each kind walked further down their sundered roads. Men
now fear and misdoubt the Elves, and yet know little of them. And
we of Gondor grow like other Men, like the men of Rohan; for even
they, who are foes of the Dark Lord, shun the Elves and speak of
the Golden Wood with dread.
‘Yet there are among us still some who have dealings with the
Elves when they may, and ever and anon one will go in secret to
Lórien, seldom to return. Not I. For I deem it perilous now for mortal
man wilfully to seek out the Elder People. Yet I envy you that have
spoken with the White Lady.’
‘The Lady of Lórien! Galadriel!’ cried Sam. ‘You should see her,
indeed you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening’s my job
at home, sir, if you understand me, and I’m not much good at poetry

682

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

but ﬁrst tell me only, if you will, whither you wish to go, and what
to do. For I must watch, and wait, and think. Time passes. In the
morning we must each go swiftly on the ways appointed to us.’
Frodo had felt himself trembling as the ﬁrst shock of fear passed.
Now a great weariness came down on him like a cloud. He could
dissemble and resist no longer.
‘I was going to ﬁnd a way into Mordor,’ he said faintly. ‘I was
going to Gorgoroth. I must ﬁnd the Mountain of Fire and cast the
thing into the gulf of Doom. Gandalf said so. I do not think I shall
ever get there.’
Faramir stared at him for a moment in grave astonishment. Then
suddenly he caught him as he swayed, and lifting him gently, carried
him to the bed and laid him there, and covered him warmly. At once
he fell into a deep sleep.
Another bed was set beside him for his servant. Sam hesitated for
a moment, then bowing very low: ‘Good night, Captain, my lord,’
he said. ‘You took the chance, sir.’
‘Did I so?’ said Faramir.
‘Yes sir, and showed your quality: the very highest.’
Faramir smiled. ‘A pert servant, Master Samwise. But nay: the
praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. Yet there was naught
in this to praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.’
‘Ah well, sir,’ said Sam, ‘you said my master had an Elvish air;
and that was good and true. But I can say this: you have an air too,
sir, that reminds me of, of – well, Gandalf, of wizards.’
‘Maybe,’ said Faramir. ‘Maybe you discern from far away the air
of Númenor. Good night!’

THE FORBIDDEN POOL

685

and louder. He could not see, but he guessed well enough from their
words what they were looking at.
‘You know, then, what this thing is?’ said Faramir. ‘Come, now
you have seen, tell me why it should be spared. In all our words
together you have not once spoken of your gangrel companion, and
I let him be for the time. He could wait till he was caught and brought
before me. I sent my keenest huntsmen to seek him, but he slipped
them, and they had no sight of him till now, save Anborn here, once
at dusk yesterevening. But now he has done worse trespass than only
to go coney-snaring in the uplands: he has dared to come to Henneth
Annûn, and his life is forfeit. I marvel at the creature: so secret and
so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before our very window.
Does he think that men sleep without watch all night? Why does he
so?’
‘There are two answers, I think,’ said Frodo. ‘For one thing, he
knows little of Men, and sly though he is, your refuge is so hidden
that perhaps he does not know that Men are concealed here. For
another, I think he is allured here by a mastering desire, stronger
than his caution.’
‘He is lured here, you say?’ said Faramir in a low voice. ‘Can he,
does he then know of your burden?’
‘Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.’
‘He bore it?’ said Faramir, breathing sharply in his wonder. ‘This
matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it?’
‘Maybe. It is precious to him. But I did not speak of that.’
‘What then does the creature seek?’
‘Fish,’ said Frodo. ‘Look!’
They peered down at the dark pool. A little black head appeared
at the far end of the basin, just out of the deep shadow of the rocks.
There was a brief silver glint, and a swirl of tiny ripples. It swam to
the side, and then with marvellous agility a froglike ﬁgure climbed
out of the water and up the bank. At once it sat down and began to
gnaw at the small silver thing that glittered as it turned: the last rays
of the moon were now falling behind the stony wall at the pool’s end.
Faramir laughed softly. ‘Fish!’ he said. ‘It is a less perilous hunger.
Or maybe not: ﬁsh from the pool of Henneth Annûn may cost him
all he has to give.’
‘Now I have him at the arrow-point,’ said Anborn. ‘Shall I not
shoot, Captain? For coming unbidden to this place death is our law.’
‘Wait, Anborn,’ said Faramir. ‘This is a harder matter than it
seems. What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we spare?’
‘The creature is wretched and hungry,’ said Frodo, ‘and unaware
of his danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he would have bidden

686

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

you not to slay him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the
Elves to do so. I do not know clearly why, and of what I guess I
cannot speak openly out here. But this creature is in some way bound
up with my errand. Until you found us and took us, he was my
guide.’
‘Your guide!’ said Faramir. ‘The matter becomes ever stranger. I
would do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let this
sly wanderer go free at his own will from here, to join you later if it
please him, or to be caught by orcs and tell all he knows under threat
of pain. He must be slain or taken. Slain, if he be not taken very
swiftly. But how can this slippery thing of many guises be caught,
save by a feathered shaft?’
‘Let me go down quietly to him,’ said Frodo. ‘You may keep your
bows bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.’
‘Go then and be swift!’ said Faramir. ‘If he comes off alive, he
should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead
Frodo down to the bank, Anborn, and go softly. The thing has a
nose and ears. Give me your bow.’
Anborn grunted and led the way down the winding stair to the
landing, and then up the other stair, until at last they came to a
narrow opening shrouded with thick bushes. Passing silently through,
Frodo found himself on the top of the southern bank above the pool.
It was now dark and the falls were pale and grey, reﬂecting only the
lingering moonlight of the western sky. He could not see Gollum.
He went forward a short way and Anborn came softly behind him.
‘Go on!’ he breathed in Frodo’s ear. ‘Have a care to your right.
If you fall in the pool, then no one but your ﬁshing friend can help
you. And forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you
may not see them.’
Frodo crept forward, using his hands Gollum-like to feel his way
and to steady himself. The rocks were for the most part ﬂat and
smooth but slippery. He halted listening. At ﬁrst he could hear no
sound but the unceasing rush of the fall behind him. Then presently
he heard, not far ahead, a hissing murmur.
‘Fissh, nice ﬁssh. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last,
yes. Now we can eat ﬁsh in peace. No, not in peace, precious. For
Precious is lost; yes, lost. Dirty hobbits, nasty hobbits. Gone and left
us, gollum; and Precious is gone. Only poor Sméagol all alone. No
Precious. Nasty Men, they’ll take it, steal my Precious. Thieves. We
hates them. Fissh, nice ﬁssh. Makes us strong. Makes eyes bright,
ﬁngers tight, yes. Throttle them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if
we gets chances. Nice ﬁssh. Nice ﬁssh!’
So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall, only interrupted
by a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo shivered, listening

THE FORBIDDEN POOL

687

with pity and disgust. He wished it would stop, and that he never
need hear that voice again. Anborn was not far behind. He could
creep back and ask him to get the huntsmen to shoot. They would
probably get close enough, while Gollum was gorging and off his
guard. Only one true shot, and Frodo would be rid of the miserable
voice for ever. But no, Gollum had a claim on him now. The servant
has a claim on the master for service, even service in fear. They would
have foundered in the Dead Marshes but for Gollum. Frodo knew,
too, somehow, quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished it.
‘Sméagol!’ he said softly.
‘Fissh, nice ﬁssh,’ said the voice.
‘Sméagol!’ he said, a little louder. The voice stopped.
‘Sméagol, Master has come to look for you. Master is here. Come,
Sméagol!’ There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of intaken breath.
‘Come, Sméagol!’ said Frodo. ‘We are in danger. Men will kill
you, if they ﬁnd you here. Come quickly, if you wish to escape death.
Come to Master!’
‘No!’ said the voice. ‘Not nice Master. Leaves poor Sméagol and
goes with new friends. Master can wait. Sméagol hasn’t ﬁnished.’
‘There’s no time,’ said Frodo. ‘Bring ﬁsh with you. Come!’
‘No! Must ﬁnish ﬁsh.’
‘Sméagol!’ said Frodo desperately. ‘Precious will be angry. I shall
take Precious, and I shall say: make him swallow the bones and
choke. Never taste ﬁsh again. Come, Precious is waiting!’
There was a sharp hiss. Presently out of the darkness Gollum came
crawling on all fours, like an erring dog called to heel. He had a
half-eaten ﬁsh in his mouth and another in his hand. He came close
to Frodo, almost nose to nose, and sniffed at him. His pale eyes were
shining. Then he took the ﬁsh out of his mouth and stood up.
‘Nice Master!’ he whispered. ‘Nice hobbit, come back to poor
Sméagol. Good Sméagol comes. Now let’s go, go quickly, yes.
Through the trees, while the Faces are dark. Yes, come, let’s go!’
‘Yes, we’ll go soon,’ said Frodo. ‘But not at once. I will go with
you as I promised. I promise again. But not now. You are not safe
yet. I will save you, but you must trust me.’
‘We must trust Master?’ said Gollum doubtfully. ‘Why? Why not
go at once? Where is the other one, the cross rude hobbit? Where is
he?’
‘Away up there,’ said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. ‘I am not
going without him. We must go back to him.’ His heart sank. This
was too much like trickery. He did not really fear that Faramir would
allow Gollum to be killed, but he would probably make him prisoner
and bind him; and certainly what Frodo did would seem a treachery
to the poor treacherous creature. It would probably be impossible

THE FORBIDDEN POOL

693

‘I know not. Only I would not have you go to death or to torment.
And I do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way.’
‘Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can ﬁnd. And
there is no time for long searching,’ said Frodo.
‘It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,’ said Faramir. ‘But at
the least, remember my warning: beware of this guide, Sméagol. He
has done murder before now. I read it in him.’ He sighed.
‘Well, so we meet and part, Frodo son of Drogo. You have no
need of soft words: I do not hope to see you again on any other day
under this Sun. But you shall go now with my blessing upon you,
and upon all your people. Rest a little while food is prepared for you.
‘I would gladly learn how this creeping Sméagol became possessed
of the Thing of which we speak, and how he lost it, but I will not
trouble you now. If ever beyond hope you return to the lands of the
living and we re-tell our tales, sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing
at old grief, you shall tell me then. Until that time, or some other
time beyond the vision of the Seeing-stones of Númenor, farewell!’
He rose and bowed low to Frodo, and drawing the curtain passed
out into the cave.

700

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

lighter: darker and darker. As far as I can tell, it isn’t midday yet,
and you’ve only slept for about three hours.’
‘I wonder what’s up,’ said Sam. ‘Is there a storm coming? If so
it’s going to be the worst there ever was. We shall wish we were down
a deep hole, not just stuck under a hedge.’ He listened. ‘What’s that?
Thunder, or drums, or what is it?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It’s been going on for a good while
now. Sometimes the ground seems to tremble, sometimes it seems
to be the heavy air throbbing in your ears.’
Sam looked round. ‘Where’s Gollum?’ he said. ‘Hasn’t he come
back yet?’
‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘There’s not been a sign or sound of him.’
‘Well, I can’t abide him,’ said Sam. ‘In fact, I’ve never taken
anything on a journey that I’d have been less sorry to lose on the
way. But it would be just like him, after coming all these miles, to
go and get lost now, just when we shall need him most – that is, if
he’s ever going to be any use, which I doubt.’
‘You forget the Marshes,’ said Frodo. ‘I hope nothing has happened to him.’
‘And I hope he’s up to no tricks. And anyway I hope he doesn’t
fall into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we shall
soon be in for trouble.’
At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again,
louder now and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their
feet. ‘I think we are in for trouble anyhow,’ said Frodo. ‘I’m afraid
our journey is drawing to an end.’
‘Maybe,’ said Sam; ‘but where there’s life there’s hope, as my gaffer
used to say; and need of vittles, as he mostways used to add. You have
a bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.’
The afternoon, as Sam supposed it must be called, wore on. Looking out from the covert he could see only a dun, shadowless world,
fading slowly into a featureless, colourless gloom. It felt stiﬂing but
not warm. Frodo slept unquietly, turning and tossing, and sometimes
murmuring. Twice Sam thought he heard him speaking Gandalf ’s
name. The time seemed to drag interminably. Suddenly Sam heard
a hiss behind him, and there was Gollum on all fours, peering at
them with gleaming eyes.
‘Wake up, wake up! Wake up, sleepies!’ he whispered. ‘Wake up!
No time to lose. We must go, yes, we must go at once. No time to
lose!’
Sam stared at him suspiciously: he seemed frightened or excited.
‘Go now? What’s your little game? It isn’t time yet. It can’t be tea-time
even, leastways not in decent places where there is tea-time.’

708

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Frodo raised his head, and then stood up. Despair had not left
him, but the weakness had passed. He even smiled grimly, feeling
now as clearly as a moment before he had felt the opposite, that what
he had to do, he had to do, if he could, and that whether Faramir
or Aragorn or Elrond or Galadriel or Gandalf or anyone else ever
knew about it was beside the purpose. He took his staff in one hand
and the phial in his other. When he saw that the clear light was
already welling through his ﬁngers, he thrust it into his bosom and
held it against his heart. Then turning from the city of Morgul, now
no more than a grey glimmer across a dark gulf, he prepared to take
the upward road.
Gollum, it seemed, had crawled off along the ledge into the darkness beyond, when the gates of Minas Morgul opened, leaving the
hobbits where they lay. He now came creeping back, his teeth
chattering and his ﬁngers snapping. ‘Foolish! Silly!’ he hissed. ‘Make
haste! They mustn’t think danger has passed. It hasn’t. Make haste!’
They did not answer, but they followed him on to the climbing
ledge. It was little to the liking of either of them, not even after facing
so many other perils; but it did not last long. Soon the path reached
a rounded angle where the mountain-side swelled out again, and
there it suddenly entered a narrow opening in the rock. They had
come to the ﬁrst stair that Gollum had spoken of. The darkness was
almost complete, and they could see nothing much beyond their
hands’ stretch; but Gollum’s eyes shone pale, several feet above, as
he turned back towards them.
‘Careful!’ he whispered. ‘Steps. Lots of steps. Must be careful!’
Care was certainly needed. Frodo and Sam at ﬁrst felt easier,
having now a wall on either side, but the stairway was almost as steep
as a ladder, and as they climbed up and up, they became more and
more aware of the long black fall behind them. And the steps were
narrow, spaced unevenly, and often treacherous: they were worn and
smooth at the edges, and some were broken, and some cracked as
foot was set upon them. The hobbits struggled on, until at last they
were clinging with desperate ﬁngers to the steps ahead, and forcing
their aching knees to bend and straighten; and ever as the stair cut
its way deeper into the sheer mountain the rocky walls rose higher
and higher above their heads.
At length, just as they felt that they could endure no more, they
saw Gollum’s eyes peering down at them again. ‘We’re up,’ he whispered. ‘First stair’s past. Clever hobbits to climb so high, very clever
hobbits. Just a few more little steps and that’s all, yes.’
Dizzy and very tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up
the last step, and sat down rubbing their legs and knees. They were

732

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

lonely journey – for vengeance. If once he could go, his anger would
bear him down all the roads of the world, pursuing, until he had him
at last: Gollum. Then Gollum would die in a corner. But that was
not what he had set out to do. It would not be worth while to leave
his master for that. It would not bring him back. Nothing would.
They had better both be dead together. And that too would be a
lonely journey.
He looked on the bright point of the sword. He thought of the
places behind where there was a black brink and an empty fall into
nothingness. There was no escape that way. That was to do nothing,
not even to grieve. That was not what he had set out to do. ‘What
am I to do then?’ he cried again, and now he seemed plainly to know
the hard answer: see it through. Another lonely journey, and the worst.
‘What? Me, alone, go to the Crack of Doom and all?’ He quailed
still, but the resolve grew. ‘What? Me take the Ring from him? The
Council gave it to him.’
But the answer came at once: ‘And the Council gave him companions, so that the errand should not fail. And you are the last of
all the Company. The errand must not fail.’
‘I wish I wasn’t the last,’ he groaned. ‘I wish old Gandalf was here,
or somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind? I’m sure
to go wrong. And it’s not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself
forward.’
‘But you haven’t put yourself forward; you’ve been put forward.
And as for not being the right and proper person, why, Mr. Frodo
wasn’t, as you might say, nor Mr. Bilbo. They didn’t choose themselves.’
‘Ah well, I must make up my own mind. I will make it up. But
I’ll be sure to go wrong: that’d be Sam Gamgee all over.
‘Let me see now: if we’re found here, or Mr. Frodo’s found, and
that Thing’s on him, well, the Enemy will get it. And that’s the end
of all of us, of Lórien, and Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And
there’s no time to lose, or it’ll be the end anyway. The war’s begun,
and more than likely things are all going the Enemy’s way already.
No chance to go back with It and get advice or permission. No, it’s
sit here till they come and kill me over master’s body, and gets It;
or take It and go.’ He drew a deep breath. ‘Then take It, it is!’
He stooped. Very gently he undid the clasp at the neck and slipped
his hand inside Frodo’s tunic; then with his other hand raising the
head, he kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over it.
And then the head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came
over the still face, and by that more than by all other tokens Sam
was convinced at last that Frodo had died and laid aside the Quest.

Chapter 1
MINAS TIRITH
Pippin looked out from the shelter of Gandalf ’s cloak. He wondered
if he was awake or still sleeping, still in the swift-moving dream in
which he had been wrapped so long since the great ride began. The
dark world was rushing by and the wind sang loudly in his ears. He
could see nothing but the wheeling stars, and away to his right vast
shadows against the sky where the mountains of the South marched
past. Sleepily he tried to reckon the times and stages of their journey,
but his memory was drowsy and uncertain.
There had been the ﬁrst ride at terrible speed without a halt, and
then in the dawn he had seen a pale gleam of gold, and they had
come to the silent town and the great empty house on the hill. And
hardly had they reached its shelter when the winged shadow had
passed over once again, and men wilted with fear. But Gandalf had
spoken soft words to him, and he had slept in a corner, tired but
uneasy, dimly aware of comings and goings and of men talking and
Gandalf giving orders. And then again riding, riding in the night.
This was the second, no, the third night since he had looked in the
Stone. And with that hideous memory he woke fully, and shivered,
and the noise of the wind became ﬁlled with menacing voices.
A light kindled in the sky, a blaze of yellow ﬁre behind dark barriers. Pippin cowered back, afraid for a moment, wondering into what
dreadful country Gandalf was bearing him. He rubbed his eyes, and
then he saw that it was the moon rising above the eastern shadows,
now almost at the full. So the night was not yet old and for hours
the dark journey would go on. He stirred and spoke.
‘Where are we, Gandalf ?’ he asked.
‘In the realm of Gondor,’ the wizard answered. ‘The land of
Anórien is still passing by.’
There was a silence again for a while. Then, ‘What is that?’ cried
Pippin suddenly, clutching at Gandalf ’s cloak. ‘Look! Fire, red ﬁre!
Are there dragons in this land? Look, there is another!’
For answer Gandalf cried aloud to his horse. ‘On, Shadowfax! We
must hasten. Time is short. See! The beacons of Gondor are alight,
calling for aid. War is kindled. See, there is the ﬁre on Amon Dı̂n,
and ﬂame on Eilenach; and there they go speeding west: Nardol,
Erelas, Min-Rimmon, Calenhad, and the Haliﬁrien on the borders
of Rohan.’
But Shadowfax paused in his stride, slowing to a walk, and then

748

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

he lifted up his head and neighed. And out of the darkness the
answering neigh of other horses came; and presently the thudding of
hoofs was heard, and three riders swept up and passed like ﬂying
ghosts in the moon and vanished into the West. Then Shadowfax
gathered himself together and sprang away, and the night ﬂowed over
him like a roaring wind.
Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf
telling him of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City
had beacons built on the tops of outlying hills along both borders of
the great range, and maintained posts at these points where fresh
horses were always in readiness to bear his errand-riders to Rohan
in the North, or to Belfalas in the South. ‘It is long since the beacons
of the North were lit,’ he said; ‘and in the ancient days of Gondor
they were not needed, for they had the Seven Stones.’ Pippin stirred
uneasily.
‘Sleep again, and do not be afraid!’ said Gandalf. ‘For you are not
going like Frodo to Mordor, but to Minas Tirith, and there you will
be as safe as you can be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or
the Ring is taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.’
‘You do not comfort me,’ said Pippin, but nonetheless sleep crept
over him. The last thing that he remembered before he fell into deep
dream was a glimpse of high white peaks, glimmering like ﬂoating
isles above the clouds as they caught the light of the westering moon.
He wondered where Frodo was, and if he was already in Mordor, or
if he was dead; and he did not know that Frodo from far away looked
on that same moon as it set beyond Gondor ere the coming of the
day.
Pippin woke to the sound of voices. Another day of hiding and a
night of journey had ﬂeeted by. It was twilight: the cold dawn was
at hand again, and chill grey mists were about them. Shadowfax stood
steaming with sweat, but he held his neck proudly and showed no
sign of weariness. Many tall men heavily cloaked stood beside him,
and behind them in the mist loomed a wall of stone. Partly ruinous
it seemed, but already before the night was passed the sound of
hurried labour could be heard: beat of hammers, clink of trowels,
and the creak of wheels. Torches and ﬂares glowed dully here and
there in the fog. Gandalf was speaking to the men that barred his
way, and as he listened Pippin became aware that he himself was
being discussed.
‘Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,’ said the leader of the men,
‘and you know the pass-words of the Seven Gates and are free to go
forward. But we do not know your companion. What is he? A dwarf
out of the mountains in the North? We wish for no strangers in the

MINAS TIRITH

749

land at this time, unless they be mighty men of arms in whose faith
and help we can trust.’
‘I will vouch for him before the seat of Denethor,’ said Gandalf.
‘And as for valour, that cannot be computed by stature. He has
passed through more battles and perils than you have, Ingold, though
you be twice his height; and he comes now from the storming of
Isengard, of which we bear tidings, and great weariness is on him,
or I would wake him. His name is Peregrin, a very valiant man.’
‘Man?’ said Ingold dubiously, and the others laughed.
‘Man!’ cried Pippin, now thoroughly roused. ‘Man! Indeed not! I
am a hobbit and no more valiant than I am a man, save perhaps now
and again by necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!’
‘Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,’ said Ingold. ‘But
what is a hobbit?’
‘A Halﬂing,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Nay, not the one that was spoken
of,’ he added seeing the wonder in the men’s faces. ‘Not he, yet one
of his kindred.’
‘Yes, and one who journeyed with him,’ said Pippin. ‘And Boromir
of your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North,
and at the last he was slain defending me from many foes.’
‘Peace!’ said Gandalf. ‘The news of that grief should have been
told ﬁrst to the father.’
‘It has been guessed already,’ said Ingold; ‘for there have been
strange portents here of late. But pass on now quickly! For the Lord
of Minas Tirith will be eager to see any that bear the latest tidings
of his son, be he man or——’
‘Hobbit,’ said Pippin. ‘Little service can I offer to your lord, but
what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.’
‘Fare you well!’ said Ingold; and the men made way for Shadowfax,
and he passed through a narrow gate in the wall. ‘May you bring
good counsel to Denethor in his need, and to us all, Mithrandir!’
Ingold cried. ‘But you come with tidings of grief and danger, as is
your wont, they say.’
‘Because I come seldom but when my help is needed,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘And as for counsel, to you I would say that you are over-late
in repairing the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will now be your best
defence against the storm that is at hand – that and such hope as I
bring. For not all the tidings that I bring are evil. But leave your
trowels and sharpen your swords!’
‘The work will be ﬁnished ere evening,’ said Ingold. ‘This is the
last portion of the wall to be put in defence: the least open to attack,
for it looks towards our friends of Rohan. Do you know aught of
them? Will they answer the summons, think you?’
‘Yes, they will come. But they have fought many battles at your

750

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

back. This road and no road looks towards safety any longer. Be
vigilant! But for Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host of
foes coming out of Anórien and no Riders of Rohan. And you may
yet. Fare you well, and sleep not!’
Gandalf passed now into the wide land beyond the Rammas Echor.
So the men of Gondor called the out-wall that they had built with
great labour, after Ithilien fell under the shadow of their Enemy. For
ten leagues or more it ran from the mountains’ feet and so back
again, enclosing in its fence the ﬁelds of the Pelennor: fair and fertile
townlands on the long slopes and terraces falling to the deep levels
of the Anduin. At its furthest point from the Great Gate of the City,
north-eastward, the wall was four leagues distant, and there from a
frowning bank it overlooked the long ﬂats beside the river, and men
had made it high and strong; for at that point, upon a walled causeway, the road came in from the fords and bridges of Osgiliath and
passed through a guarded gate between embattled towers. At its
nearest point the wall was little more than one league from the City,
and that was south-eastward. There Anduin, going in a wide knee
about the hills of Emyn Arnen in South Ithilien, bent sharply west,
and the out-wall rose upon its very brink; and beneath it lay the
quays and landings of the Harlond for craft that came upstream from
the southern ﬁefs.
The townlands were rich, with wide tilth and many orchards, and
homesteads there were with oast and garner, fold and byre, and many
rills rippling through the green from the highlands down to Anduin.
Yet the herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many,
and the most part of the people of Gondor lived in the seven circles
of the City, or in the high vales of the mountain-borders, in Lossarnach, or further south in fair Lebennin with its ﬁve swift streams.
There dwelt a hardy folk between the mountains and the sea. They
were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood was mingled, and
there were short and swarthy folk among them whose sires came
more from the forgotten men who housed in the shadow of the hills
in the Dark Years ere the coming of the kings. But beyond, in the
great ﬁef of Belfalas, dwelt Prince Imrahil in his castle of Dol Amroth
by the sea, and he was of high blood, and his folk also, tall men and
proud with sea-grey eyes.
Now after Gandalf had ridden for some time the light of day grew
in the sky, and Pippin roused himself and looked up. To his left lay
a sea of mist, rising to a bleak shadow in the East; but to his right
great mountains reared their heads, ranging from the West to a steep
and sudden end, as if in the making of the land the River had burst
through a great barrier, carving out a mighty valley to be a land of

MINAS TIRITH

751

battle and debate in times to come. And there where the White
Mountains of Ered Nimrais came to their end he saw, as Gandalf
had promised, the dark mass of Mount Mindolluin, the deep purple
shadows of its high glens, and its tall face whitening in the rising day.
And upon its out-thrust knee was the Guarded City, with its seven
walls of stone so strong and old that it seemed to have been not
builded but carven by giants out of the bones of the earth.
Even as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls passed from looming
grey to white, blushing faintly in the dawn; and suddenly the sun
climbed over the eastern shadow and sent forth a shaft that smote
the face of the City. Then Pippin cried aloud, for the Tower of
Ecthelion, standing high within the topmost wall, shone out against
the sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl and silver, tall and fair and
shapely, and its pinnacle glittered as if it were wrought of crystals;
and white banners broke and ﬂuttered from the battlements in the
morning breeze, and high and far he heard a clear ringing as of silver
trumpets.
So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate of the Men of
Gondor at the rising of the sun, and its iron doors rolled back before
them.
‘Mithrandir! Mithrandir!’ men cried. ‘Now we know that the storm
is indeed nigh!’
‘It is upon you,’ said Gandalf. ‘I have ridden on its wings. Let me
pass! I must come to your Lord Denethor, while his stewardship
lasts. Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that
you have known. Let me pass!’
Then men fell back before the command of his voice and questioned him no further, though they gazed in wonder at the hobbit
that sat before him and at the horse that bore him. For the people
of the City used horses very little and they were seldom seen in their
streets, save only those ridden by the errand-riders of their lord. And
they said: ‘Surely that is one of the great steeds of the King of Rohan?
Maybe the Rohirrim will come soon to strengthen us.’ But Shadowfax
walked proudly up the long winding road.
For the fashion of Minas Tirith was such that it was built on seven
levels, each delved into the hill, and about each was set a wall, and
in each wall was a gate. But the gates were not set in a line: the Great
Gate in the City Wall was at the east point of the circuit, but the
next faced half south, and the third half north, and so to and fro
upwards; so that the paved way that climbed towards the Citadel
turned ﬁrst this way and then that across the face of the hill. And
each time that it passed the line of the Great Gate it went through

752

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

an arched tunnel, piercing a vast pier of rock whose huge out-thrust
bulk divided in two all the circles of the City save the ﬁrst. For partly
in the primeval shaping of the hill, partly by the mighty craft and
labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the wide court behind
the Gate a towering bastion of stone, its edge sharp as a ship-keel
facing east. Up it rose, even to the level of the topmost circle, and
there was crowned by a battlement; so that those in the Citadel might,
like mariners in a mountainous ship, look from its peak sheer down
upon the Gate seven hundred feet below. The entrance to the Citadel
also looked eastward, but was delved in the heart of the rock; thence
a long lamp-lit slope ran up to the seventh gate. Thus men reached
at last the High Court, and the Place of the Fountain before the feet
of the White Tower: tall and shapely, ﬁfty fathoms from its base to
the pinnacle, where the banner of the Stewards ﬂoated a thousand
feet above the plain.
A strong citadel it was indeed, and not to be taken by a host of
enemies, if there were any within that could hold weapons; unless
some foe could come behind and scale the lower skirts of Mindolluin,
and so come upon the narrow shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard
to the mountain mass. But that shoulder, which rose to the height
of the ﬁfth wall, was hedged with great ramparts right up to the
precipice that overhung its western end; and in that space stood the
houses and domed tombs of bygone kings and lords, for ever silent
between the mountain and the tower.
Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone city, vaster and
more splendid than anything that he had dreamed of; greater and
stronger than Isengard, and far more beautiful. Yet it was in truth
falling year by year into decay; and already it lacked half the men
that could have dwelt at ease there. In every street they passed some
great house or court over whose doors and arched gates were carved
many fair letters of strange and ancient shapes: names Pippin guessed
of great men and kindreds that had once dwelt there; and yet now
they were silent, and no footsteps rang on their wide pavements, nor
voice was heard in their halls, nor any face looked out from door or
empty window.
At last they came out of shadow to the seventh gate, and the warm
sun that shone down beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades
of Ithilien, glowed here on the smooth walls and rooted pillars, and
the great arch with keystone carven in the likeness of a crowned and
kingly head. Gandalf dismounted, for no horse was allowed in the
Citadel, and Shadowfax suffered himself to be led away at the soft
word of his master.
The Guards of the gate were robed in black, and their helms were

MINAS TIRITH

753

of strange shape, high-crowned, with long cheek-guards close-ﬁtting
to the face, and above the cheek-guards were set the white wings of
sea-birds; but the helms gleamed with a ﬂame of silver, for they were
indeed wrought of mithril, heirlooms from the glory of old days. Upon
the black surcoats were embroidered in white a tree blossoming like
snow beneath a silver crown and many-pointed stars. This was the
livery of the heirs of Elendil, and none wore it now in all Gondor,
save the Guards of the Citadel before the Court of the Fountain
where the White Tree once had grown.
Already it seemed that word of their coming had gone before
them; and at once they were admitted, silently, and without question.
Quickly Gandalf strode across the white-paved court. A sweet fountain played there in the morning sun, and a sward of bright green
lay about it; but in the midst, drooping over the pool, stood a dead
tree, and the falling drops dripped sadly from its barren and broken
branches back into the clear water.
Pippin glanced at it as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful, he thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was left in this
place where everything else was well tended.
Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree.
The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into his mind.
And then he found himself at the doors of the great hall beneath
the gleaming tower; and behind the wizard he passed the tall silent
door-wardens and entered the cool echoing shadows of the house of
stone.
They walked down a paved passage, long and empty, and as they
went Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin. ‘Be careful of your words,
Master Peregrin! This is no time for hobbit pertness. Théoden is a
kindly old man. Denethor is of another sort, proud and subtle, a man
of far greater lineage and power, though he is not called a king. But
he will speak most to you, and question you much, since you can
tell him of his son Boromir. He loved him greatly: too much perhaps;
and the more so because they were unlike. But under cover of this
love he will think it easier to learn what he wishes from you rather
than from me. Do not tell him more than you need, and leave quiet
the matter of Frodo’s errand. I will deal with that in due time. And
say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.’
‘Why not? What is wrong with Strider?’ Pippin whispered. ‘He
meant to come here, didn’t he? And he’ll be arriving soon himself,
anyway.’
‘Maybe, maybe,’ said Gandalf. ‘Though if he comes, it is likely to
be in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be
better so. At least he should come unheralded by us.’

754

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gandalf halted before a tall door of polished metal. ‘See, Master
Pippin, there is no time to instruct you now in the history of Gondor;
though it might have been better, if you had learned something of
it, when you were still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods
of the Shire. Do as I bid! It is scarcely wise when bringing the news
of the death of his heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the
coming of one who will, if he comes, claim the kingship. Is that
enough?’
‘Kingship?’ said Pippin amazed.
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you have walked all these days with closed
ears and mind asleep, wake up now!’ He knocked on the door.
The door opened, but no one could be seen to open it. Pippin
looked into a great hall. It was lit by deep windows in the wide aisles
at either side, beyond the rows of tall pillars that upheld the roof.
Monoliths of black marble, they rose to great capitals carved in many
strange ﬁgures of beasts and leaves; and far above in shadow the wide
vaulting gleamed with dull gold. The ﬂoor was of polished stone,
white-gleaming, inset with ﬂowing traceries of many colours. No
hangings nor storied webs, nor any things of woven stuff or of wood,
were to be seen in that long solemn hall; but between the pillars there
stood a silent company of tall images graven in cold stone.
Suddenly Pippin was reminded of the hewn rocks of Argonath,
and awe fell on him, as he looked down that avenue of kings long
dead. At the far end upon a dais of many steps was set a high throne
under a canopy of marble shaped like a crowned helm; behind it was
carved upon the wall and set with gems an image of a tree in ﬂower.
But the throne was empty. At the foot of the dais, upon the lowest
step which was broad and deep, there was a stone chair, black and
unadorned, and on it sat an old man gazing at his lap. In his hand
was a white rod with a golden knob. He did not look up. Solemnly
they paced the long ﬂoor towards him, until they stood three paces
from his footstool. Then Gandalf spoke.
‘Hail, Lord and Steward of Minas Tirith, Denethor son of
Ecthelion! I am come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour.’
Then the old man looked up. Pippin saw his carven face with its
proud bones and skin like ivory, and the long curved nose between
the dark deep eyes; and he was reminded not so much of Boromir
as of Aragorn. ‘Dark indeed is the hour,’ said the old man, ‘and at
such times you are wont to come, Mithrandir. But though all the
signs forebode that the doom of Gondor is drawing nigh, less now
to me is that darkness than my own darkness. It has been told to me
that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?’
‘It is,’ said Gandalf. ‘One of the twain. The other is with Théoden

MINAS TIRITH

755

of Rohan and may come hereafter. Halﬂings they are, as you see, yet
this is not he of whom the omens spoke.’
‘Yet a Halﬂing still,’ said Denethor grimly, ‘and little love do I
bear the name, since those accursed words came to trouble our counsels and drew away my son on the wild errand to his death. My
Boromir! Now we have need of you. Faramir should have gone in
his stead.’
‘He would have gone,’ said Gandalf. ‘Be not unjust in your grief !
Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have
it. He was a masterful man, and one to take what he desired. I
journeyed far with him and learned much of his mood. But you speak
of his death. You have had news of that ere we came?’
‘I have received this,’ said Denethor, and laying down his rod he
lifted from his lap the thing that he had been gazing at. In each hand
he held up one half of a great horn cloven through the middle: a
wild-ox horn bound with silver.
‘That is the horn that Boromir always wore!’ cried Pippin.
‘Verily,’ said Denethor. ‘And in my turn I bore it, and so did each
eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the
failing of the kings, since Vorondil father of Mardil hunted the wild
kine of Araw in the far ﬁelds of Rhûn. I heard it blowing dim upon
the northern marches thirteen days ago, and the River brought it to
me, broken: it will wind no more.’ He paused and there was a heavy
silence. Suddenly he turned his black glance upon Pippin. ‘What say
you to that, Halﬂing?’
‘Thirteen, thirteen days,’ faltered Pippin. ‘Yes, I think that would
be so. Yes, I stood beside him, as he blew the horn. But no help
came. Only more orcs.’
‘So,’ said Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin’s face. ‘You were
there? Tell me more! Why did no help come? And how did you
escape, and yet he did not, so mighty a man as he was, and only orcs
to withstand him?’
Pippin ﬂushed and forgot his fear. ‘The mightiest man may be
slain by one arrow,’ he said; ‘and Boromir was pierced by many.
When last I saw him he sank beside a tree and plucked a blackfeathered shaft from his side. Then I swooned and was made captive.
I saw him no more, and know no more. But I honour his memory,
for he was very valiant. He died to save us, my kinsman Meriadoc
and myself, waylaid in the woods by the soldiery of the Dark Lord;
and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.’
Then Pippin looked the old man in the eye, for pride stirred
strangely within him, still stung by the scorn and suspicion in that
cold voice. ‘Little service, no doubt, will so great a lord of Men think
to ﬁnd in a hobbit, a halﬂing from the northern Shire; yet such as it

756

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

is, I will offer it, in payment of my debt.’ Twitching aside his grey
cloak, Pippin drew forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor’s
feet.
A pale smile, like a gleam of cold sun on a winter’s evening, passed
over the old man’s face; but he bent his head and held out his hand,
laying the shards of the horn aside. ‘Give me the weapon!’ he said.
Pippin lifted it and presented the hilt to him. ‘Whence came this?’
said Denethor. ‘Many, many years lie on it. Surely this is a blade
wrought by our own kindred in the North in the deep past?’
‘It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country,’
said Pippin. ‘But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not
willingly tell more of them.’
‘I see that strange tales are woven about you,’ said Denethor, ‘and
once again it is shown that looks may belie the man – or the halﬂing.
I accept your service. For you are not daunted by words; and you
have courteous speech, strange though the sound of it may be to us
in the South. And we shall have need of all folk of courtesy, be they
great or small, in the days to come. Swear to me now!’
‘Take the hilt,’ said Gandalf, ‘and speak after the Lord, if you are
resolved on this.’
‘I am,’ said Pippin.
The old man laid the sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand
to the hilt, and said slowly after Denethor:
‘Here do I swear fealty and service to Gondor, and to the Lord
and Steward of the realm, to speak and to be silent, to do and to let
be, to come and to go, in need or plenty, in peace or war, in living
or dying, from this hour henceforth, until my lord release me, or
death take me, or the world end. So say I, Peregrin son of Paladin
of the Shire of the Halﬂings.’
‘And this do I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord of Gondor,
Steward of the High King, and I will not forget it, nor fail to reward
that which is given: fealty with love, valour with honour, oathbreaking with vengeance.’ Then Pippin received back his sword and
put it in its sheath.
‘And now,’ said Denethor, ‘my ﬁrst command to you: speak and
be not silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that
you can of Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!’ As he spoke he
struck a small silver gong that stood near his footstool, and at once
servants came forward. Pippin saw then that they had been standing
in alcoves on either side of the door, unseen as he and Gandalf
entered.
‘Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,’ said Denethor,
‘and see that none trouble us for one hour.’
‘It is all that I have to spare, for there is much else to heed,’ he

MINAS TIRITH

757

said to Gandalf. ‘Much of more import, it may seem, and yet to me
less pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.’
‘And earlier, it is to be hoped,’ said Gandalf. ‘For I have not ridden
hither from Isengard, one hundred and ﬁfty leagues, with the speed
of wind, only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous. Is
it naught to you that Théoden has fought a great battle, and that
Isengard is overthrown, and that I have broken the staff of Saruman?’
‘It is much to me. But I know already sufﬁcient of these deeds for
my own counsel against the menace of the East.’ He turned his dark
eyes on Gandalf, and now Pippin saw a likeness between the two,
and he felt the strain between them, almost as if he saw a line of
smouldering ﬁre, drawn from eye to eye, that might suddenly burst
into ﬂame.
Denethor looked indeed much more like a great wizard than
Gandalf did, more kingly, beautiful, and powerful; and older. Yet by
a sense other than sight Pippin perceived that Gandalf had the greater
power and the deeper wisdom, and a majesty that was veiled. And
he was older, far older. ‘How much older?’ he wondered, and then
he thought how odd it was that he had never thought about it before.
Treebeard had said something about wizards, but even then he had
not thought of Gandalf as one of them. What was Gandalf ? In what
far time and place did he come into the world, and when would he
leave it? And then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor
and Gandalf still looked each other in the eye, as if reading the other’s
mind. But it was Denethor who ﬁrst withdrew his gaze.
‘Yea,’ he said; ‘for though the Stones be lost, they say, still the
lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many
messages come to them. But sit now!’
Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought
a salver with a silver ﬂagon and cups, and white cakes. Pippin sat
down, but he could not take his eyes from the old lord. Was it so,
or had he only imagined it, that as he spoke of the Stones a sudden
gleam of his eye had glanced upon Pippin’s face?
‘Now tell me your tale, my liege,’ said Denethor, half kindly, half
mockingly. ‘For the words of one whom my son so befriended will
be welcome indeed.’
Pippin never forgot that hour in the great hall under the piercing
eye of the Lord of Gondor, stabbed ever and anon by his shrewd
questions, and all the while conscious of Gandalf at his side, watching
and listening, and (so Pippin felt) holding in check a rising wrath
and impatience. When the hour was over and Denethor again rang
the gong, Pippin felt worn out. ‘It cannot be more than nine o’clock,’
he thought. ‘I could now eat three breakfasts on end.’

758

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Lead the Lord Mithrandir to the housing prepared for him,’ said
Denethor, ‘and his companion may lodge with him for the present,
if he will. But be it known that I have now sworn him to my service,
and he shall be known as Peregrin son of Paladin and taught the
lesser pass-words. Send word to the Captains that they shall wait on
me here, as soon as may be after the third hour has rung.
‘And you, my Lord Mithrandir, shall come too, as and when you
will. None shall hinder your coming to me at any time, save only in
my brief hours of sleep. Let your wrath at an old man’s folly run off,
and then return to my comfort!’
‘Folly?’ said Gandalf. ‘Nay, my lord, when you are a dotard you
will die. You can use even your grief as a cloak. Do you think that
I do not understand your purpose in questioning for an hour one
who knows the least, while I sit by?’
‘If you understand it, then be content,’ returned Denethor. ‘Pride
would be folly that disdained help and counsel at need; but you deal
out such gifts according to your own designs. Yet the Lord of Gondor
is not to be made the tool of other men’s purposes, however worthy.
And to him there is no purpose higher in the world as it now stands
than the good of Gondor; and the rule of Gondor, my lord, is mine
and no other man’s, unless the king should come again.’
‘Unless the king should come again?’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, my lord
Steward, it is your task to keep some kingdom still against that event,
which few now look to see. In that task you shall have all the aid that
you are pleased to ask for. But I will say this: the rule of no realm is
mine, neither of Gondor nor any other, great or small. But all worthy
things that are in peril as the world now stands, those are my care.
And for my part, I shall not wholly fail of my task, though Gondor
should perish, if anything passes through this night that can still grow
fair or bear fruit and ﬂower again in days to come. For I also am a
steward. Did you not know?’ And with that he turned and strode
from the hall with Pippin running at his side.
Gandalf did not look at Pippin or speak a word to him as they
went. Their guide brought them from the doors of the hall, and then
led them across the Court of the Fountain into a lane between tall
buildings of stone. After several turns they came to a house close to
the wall of the citadel upon the north side, not far from the shoulder
that linked the hill with the mountain. Within, upon the ﬁrst ﬂoor
above the street, up a wide carven stair, he showed them to a fair
room, light and airy, with goodly hangings of dull gold sheen
unﬁgured. It was sparely furnished, having but a small table, two
chairs and a bench; but at either side there were curtained alcoves
and well-clad beds within with vessels and basins for washing. There
were three high narrow windows that looked northward over the great

MINAS TIRITH

759

curve of Anduin, still shrouded in mists, towards the Emyn Muil and
Rauros far away. Pippin had to climb on the bench to look out over
the deep stone sill.
‘Are you angry with me, Gandalf ?’ he said, as their guide went
out and closed the door. ‘I did the best I could.’
‘You did indeed!’ said Gandalf, laughing suddenly; and he came
and stood beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit’s shoulders, and gazing out of the window. Pippin glanced in some wonder
at the face now close beside his own, for the sound of that laugh had
been gay and merry. Yet in the wizard’s face he saw at ﬁrst only lines
of care and sorrow; though as he looked more intently he perceived
that under all there was a great joy: a fountain of mirth enough to
set a kingdom laughing, were it to gush forth.
‘Indeed you did your best,’ said the wizard; ‘and I hope that it
may be long before you ﬁnd yourself in such a tight corner again
between two such terrible old men. Still the Lord of Gondor learned
more from you than you may have guessed, Pippin. You could not
hide the fact that Boromir did not lead the Company from Moria,
and that there was one among you of high honour who was coming
to Minas Tirith; and that he had a famous sword. Men think much
about the stories of old days in Gondor; and Denethor has given
long thought to the rhyme and to the words Isildur’s Bane, since
Boromir went away.
‘He is not as other men of this time, Pippin, and whatever be his
descent from father to son, by some chance the blood of Westernesse
runs nearly true in him; as it does in his other son, Faramir, and yet
did not in Boromir whom he loved best. He has long sight. He can
perceive, if he bends his will thither, much of what is passing in the
minds of men, even of those that dwell far off. It is difﬁcult to deceive
him, and dangerous to try.
‘Remember that! For you are now sworn to his service. I do not
know what put it into your head, or your heart, to do that. But it
was well done. I did not hinder it, for generous deed should not be
checked by cold counsel. It touched his heart, as well (may I say it)
as pleasing his humour. And at least you are free now to move about
as you will in Minas Tirith – when you are not on duty. For there is
another side to it. You are at his command; and he will not forget.
Be wary still!’
He fell silent and sighed. ‘Well, no need to brood on what
tomorrow may bring. For one thing, tomorrow will be certain to
bring worse than today, for many days to come. And there is nothing
more that I can do to help it. The board is set, and the pieces are
moving. One piece that I greatly desire to ﬁnd is Faramir, now the
heir of Denethor. I do not think that he is in the City; but I have

760

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

had no time to gather news. I must go, Pippin. I must go to this
lords’ council and learn what I can. But the Enemy has the move,
and he is about to open his full game. And pawns are likely to see
as much of it as any, Peregrin son of Paladin, soldier of Gondor.
Sharpen your blade!’
Gandalf went to the door, and there he turned. ‘I am in haste,
Pippin,’ he said. ‘Do me a favour when you go out. Even before you
rest, if you are not too weary. Go and ﬁnd Shadowfax and see how
he is housed. These people are kindly to beasts, for they are a good
and wise folk, but they have less skill with horses than some.’
With that Gandalf went out; and as he did so, there came the note
of a clear sweet bell ringing in a tower of the citadel. Three strokes
it rang, like silver in the air, and ceased: the third hour from the
rising of the sun.
After a minute Pippin went to the door and down the stair and
looked about the street. The sun was now shining warm and bright,
and the towers and tall houses cast long clear-cut shadows westward.
High in the blue air Mount Mindolluin lifted its white helm and
snowy cloak. Armed men went to and fro in the ways of the City, as
if going at the striking of the hour to changes of post and duty.
‘Nine o’clock we’d call it in the Shire,’ said Pippin aloud to himself.
‘Just the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring
sunshine. And how I should like breakfast! Do these people ever have
it, or is it over? And when do they have dinner, and where?’
Presently he noticed a man, clad in black and white, coming along
the narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards him. Pippin
felt lonely and made up his mind to speak as the man passed; but
he had no need. The man came straight up to him.
‘You are Peregrin the Halﬂing?’ he said. ‘I am told that you have
been sworn to the service of the Lord and of the City. Welcome!’
He held out his hand and Pippin took it.
‘I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I have been sent to you to teach you the pass-words, and
to tell you some of the many things that no doubt you will wish to
know. And for my part, I would learn of you also. For never before
have we seen a halﬂing in this land and though we have heard rumour
of them, little is said of them in any tale that we know. Moreover
you are a friend of Mithrandir. Do you know him well?’
‘Well,’ said Pippin. ‘I have known of him all my short life, as you
might say; and lately I have travelled far with him. But there is much
to read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more than a
page or two. Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn
was the only one of our Company, I think, who really knew him.’

MINAS TIRITH

761

‘Aragorn?’ said Beregond. ‘Who is he?’
‘Oh,’ stammered Pippin, ‘he was a man who went about with us.
I think he is in Rohan now.’
‘You have been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask
you of that land also; for we put much of what little hope we have
in its people. But I am forgetting my errand, which was ﬁrst to answer
what you would ask. What would you know, Master Peregrin?’
‘Er well,’ said Pippin, ‘if I may venture to say so, rather a burning
question in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all
that? I mean, what are the meal-times, if you understand me, and
where is the dining-room, if there is one? And the inns? I looked,
but never a one could I see as we rode up, though I had been borne
up by the hope of a draught of ale as soon as we came to the homes
of wise and courtly men.’
Beregond looked at him gravely. ‘An old campaigner, I see,’ he
said. ‘They say that men who go warring aﬁeld look ever to the next
hope of food and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself.
Then you have not yet eaten today?’
‘Well, yes, to speak in courtesy, yes,’ said Pippin. ‘But no more
than a cup of wine and a white cake or two by the kindness of your
lord; but he racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is
hungry work.’
Beregond laughed. ‘At the table small men may do the greater
deeds, we say. But you have broken your fast as well as any man in
the Citadel, and with greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower
of guard and is now in posture of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take
a morsel in the grey light, and go to our duties at the opening hour.
But do not despair!’ He laughed again, seeing the dismay in Pippin’s
face. ‘Those who have had heavy duty take somewhat to refresh their
strength in the mid-morning. Then there is the nuncheon, at noon
or after as duties allow; and men gather for the daymeal, and such
mirth as there still may be, about the hour of sunset.
‘Come! We will walk a little and then go ﬁnd us some refreshment,
and eat and drink on the battlement, and survey the fair morning.’
‘One moment!’ said Pippin blushing. ‘Greed, or hunger by your
courtesy, put it out of my mind. But Gandalf, Mithrandir as you call
him, asked me to see to his horse – Shadowfax, a great steed of
Rohan, and the apple of the king’s eye, I am told, though he has
given him to Mithrandir for his services. I think his new master loves
the beast better than he loves many men, and if his good will is of
any value to this city, you will treat Shadowfax with all honour: with
greater kindness than you have treated this hobbit, if it is possible.’
‘Hobbit?’ said Beregond.
‘That is what we call ourselves,’ said Pippin.

MINAS TIRITH

765

we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a little while. But we
await now a new onslaught there. Maybe the chief onslaught of the
war that comes.’
‘When?’ said Pippin. ‘Have you a guess? For I saw the beacons
two nights ago and the errand-riders; and Gandalf said that it was a
sign that war had begun. He seemed in a desperate hurry. But now
everything seems to have slowed up again.’
‘Only because everything is now ready,’ said Beregond. ‘It is but
the deep breath before the plunge.’
‘But why were the beacons lit two nights ago?’
‘It is over-late to send for aid when you are already besieged,’
answered Beregond. ‘But I do not know the counsel of the Lord and
his captains. They have many ways of gathering news. And the Lord
Denethor is unlike other men: he sees far. Some say that as he sits
alone in his high chamber in the Tower at night, and bends his
thought this way and that, he can read somewhat of the future; and
that he will at times search even the mind of the Enemy, wrestling
with him. And so it is that he is old, worn before his time. But
however that may be, my lord Faramir is abroad, beyond the River
on some perilous errand, and he may have sent tidings.
‘But if you would know what I think set the beacons ablaze, it was
the news that came that eve out of Lebennin. There is a great ﬂeet
drawing near to the mouths of Anduin, manned by the corsairs of
Umbar in the South. They have long ceased to fear the might of
Gondor, and they have allied them with the Enemy, and now make a
heavy stroke in his cause. For this attack will draw off much of the help
that we looked to have from Lebennin and Belfalas, where folk are
hardy and numerous. All the more do our thoughts go north to Rohan;
and the more glad are we for these tidings of victory that you bring.
‘And yet’ – he paused and stood up, and looked round, north,
east, and south – ‘the doings at Isengard should warn us that we are
caught now in a great net and strategy. This is no longer a bickering
at the fords, raiding from Ithilien and from Anórien, ambushing and
pillaging. This is a great war long-planned, and we are but one piece
in it, whatever pride may say. Things move in the far East beyond
the Inland Sea, it is reported; and north in Mirkwood and beyond;
and south in Harad. And now all realms shall be put to the test, to
stand, or fall – under the Shadow.
‘Yet, Master Peregrin, we have this honour: ever we bear the brunt
of the chief hatred of the Dark Lord, for that hatred comes down
out of the depths of time and over the deeps of the Sea. Here will
the hammer-stroke fall hardest. And for that reason Mithrandir came
hither in such haste. For if we fall, who shall stand? And, Master
Peregrin, do you see any hope that we shall stand?’

766

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Pippin did not answer. He looked at the great walls, and the towers
and brave banners, and the sun in the high sky, and then at the
gathering gloom in the East; and he thought of the long ﬁngers of
that Shadow: of the orcs in the woods and the mountains, the treason
of Isengard, the birds of evil eye, and the Black Riders even in the
lanes of the Shire – and of the winged terror, the Nazgûl. He shuddered, and hope seemed to wither. And even at that moment the sun
for a second faltered and was obscured, as though a dark wing had
passed across it. Almost beyond hearing he thought he caught, high
and far up in the heavens, a cry: faint, but heart-quelling, cruel and
cold. He blanched and cowered against the wall.
‘What was that?’ asked Beregond. ‘You also felt something?’
‘Yes,’ muttered Pippin. ‘It is the sign of our fall, and the shadow
of doom, a Fell Rider of the air.’
‘Yes, the shadow of doom,’ said Beregond. ‘I fear that Minas
Tirith shall fall. Night comes. The very warmth of my blood seems
stolen away.’
For a time they sat together with bowed heads and did not speak.
Then suddenly Pippin looked up and saw that the sun was still shining
and the banners still streaming in the breeze. He shook himself. ‘It
is passed,’ he said. ‘No, my heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell
and has returned and is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg,
or at least be left still upon our knees.’
‘Rightly said!’ cried Beregond, rising and striding to and fro. ‘Nay,
though all things must come utterly to an end in time, Gondor shall
not perish yet. Not though the walls be taken by a reckless foe that
will build a hill of carrion before them. There are still other fastnesses,
and secret ways of escape into the mountains. Hope and memory
shall live still in some hidden valley where the grass is green.’
‘All the same, I wish it was over for good or ill,’ said Pippin. ‘I
am no warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle; but waiting
on the edge of one that I can’t escape is worst of all. What a long
day it seems already! I should be happier, if we were not obliged to
stand and watch, making no move, striking nowhere ﬁrst. No stroke
would have been struck in Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.’
‘Ah, there you lay your ﬁnger on the sore that many feel!’ said
Beregond. ‘But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold,
more bold than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe
that a captain can be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song,
as he is, and yet a man of hardihood and swift judgement in the ﬁeld.
But such is Faramir. Less reckless and eager than Boromir, but not
less resolute. Yet what indeed can he do? We cannot assault the
mountains of – of yonder realm. Our reach is shortened, and we

MINAS TIRITH

767

cannot strike till some foe comes within it. Then our hand must be
heavy!’ He smote the hilt of his sword.
Pippin looked at him: tall and proud and noble, as all the men
that he had yet seen in that land; and with a glitter in his eye as he
thought of the battle. ‘Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,’
he thought, but he said nothing. ‘A pawn did Gandalf say? Perhaps;
but on the wrong chessboard.’
So they talked until the sun reached its height, and suddenly the
noon-bells were rung, and there was a stir in the citadel; for all save
the watchmen were going to their meal.
‘Will you come with me?’ said Beregond. ‘You may join my mess
for this day. I do not know to what company you will be assigned;
or the Lord may hold you at his own command. But you will be
welcome. And it will be well to meet as many men as you may, while
there is yet time.’
‘I shall be glad to come,’ said Pippin. ‘I am lonely, to tell you the
truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had no one
to talk to or jest with. Perhaps I could really join your company? Are
you the captain? If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?’
‘Nay, nay,’ Beregond laughed, ‘I am no captain. Neither ofﬁce
nor rank nor lordship have I, being but a plain man of arms of the
Third Company of the Citadel. Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only a
man of arms of the Guard of the Tower of Gondor is held worthy
in the City, and such men have honour in the land.’
‘Then it is far beyond me,’ said Pippin. ‘Take me back to our
room, and if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like – as your
guest.’
Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message; so Pippin
went with Beregond and was made known to the men of the Third
Company. And it seemed that Beregond got as much honour from
it as his guest, for Pippin was very welcome. There had already been
much talk in the citadel about Mithrandir’s companion and his long
closeting with the Lord; and rumour declared that a Prince of the
Halﬂings had come out of the North to offer allegiance to Gondor
and ﬁve thousand swords. And some said that when the Riders came
from Rohan each would bring behind him a halﬂing warrior, small
maybe, but doughty.
Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this hopeful tale, he
could not be rid of his new rank, only ﬁtting, men thought, to one
befriended by Boromir and honoured by the Lord Denethor; and
they thanked him for coming among them, and hung on his words
and stories of the outlands, and gave him as much food and ale as

768

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

he could wish. Indeed his only trouble was to be ‘wary’ according to
the counsel of Gandalf, and not to let his tongue wag freely after the
manner of a hobbit among friends.
At length Beregond rose. ‘Farewell for this time!’ he said. ‘I have
duty now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if
you are lonely, as you say, maybe you would like a merry guide about
the City. My son would go with you gladly. A good lad, I may say.
If that pleases you, go down to the lowest circle and ask for the Old
Guesthouse in the Rath Celerdain, the Lampwrights’ Street. You
will ﬁnd him there with other lads that are remaining in the City.
There may be things worth seeing down at the Great Gate ere the
closing.’
He went out, and soon after all the others followed. The day was
still ﬁne, though it was growing hazy, and it was hot for March,
even so far southwards. Pippin felt sleepy, but the lodging seemed
cheerless, and he decided to go down and explore the City. He took a
few morsels that he had saved to Shadowfax, and they were graciously
accepted, though the horse seemed to have no lack. Then he walked
on down many winding ways.
People stared much as he passed. To his face men were gravely
courteous, saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head
and hands upon the breast; but behind him he heard many calls, as
those out of doors cried to others within to come and see the Prince
of the Halﬂings, the companion of Mithrandir. Many used some
other tongue than the Common Speech, but it was not long before
he learned at least what was meant by Ernil i Pheriannath and knew
that his title had gone down before him into the City.
He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to the lowest and widest circle, and there he was directed to
the Lampwrights’ Street, a broad way running towards the Great
Gate. In it he found the Old Guesthouse, a large building of grey
weathered stone with two wings running back from the street, and
between them a narrow greensward, behind which was the manywindowed house, fronted along its whole width by a pillared porch
and a ﬂight of steps down on to the grass. Boys were playing among
the pillars, the only children that Pippin had seen in Minas Tirith,
and he stopped to look at them. Presently one of them caught sight
of him, and with a shout he sprang across the grass and came into
the street, followed by several others. There he stood in front of
Pippin, looking him up and down.
‘Greetings!’ said the lad. ‘Where do you come from? You are a
stranger in the City.’
‘I was,’ said Pippin; ‘but they say I have become a man of Gondor.’

772

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was on him, and now he desired very much to see Gandalf again.
‘Can you ﬁnd your way?’ said Beregond at the door of the small
hall, on the north side of the citadel, where they had sat. ‘It is a black
night, and all the blacker since orders came that lights are to be
dimmed within the City, and none are to shine out from the walls.
And I can give you news of another order: you will be summoned to
the Lord Denethor early tomorrow. I fear you will not be for the
Third Company. Still we may hope to meet again. Farewell and sleep
in peace!’
The lodging was dark, save for a little lantern set on the table.
Gandalf was not there. Gloom settled still more heavily on Pippin.
He climbed on the bench and tried to peer out of a window, but it
was like looking into a pool of ink. He got down and closed the
shutter and went to bed. For a while he lay and listened for sounds
of Gandalf ’s return, and then he fell into an uneasy sleep.
In the night he was wakened by a light, and he saw that Gandalf
had come and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain
of the alcove. There were candles on the table and rolls of parchment.
He heard the wizard sigh, and mutter: ‘When will Faramir return?’
‘Hullo!’ said Pippin, poking his head round the curtain. ‘I thought
you had forgotten all about me. I am glad to see you back. It has
been a long day.’
‘But the night will be too short,’ said Gandalf. ‘I have come back
here, for I must have a little peace, alone. You should sleep, in a bed
while you still may. At the sunrise I shall take you to the Lord
Denethor again. No, when the summons comes, not at sunrise. The
Darkness has begun. There will be no dawn.’

Chapter 2
THE PASSING OF THE
GREY COMPANY
Gandalf was gone, and the thudding hoofs of Shadowfax were lost
in the night, when Merry came back to Aragorn. He had only a light
bundle, for he had lost his pack at Parth Galen, and all he had was
a few useful things he had picked up among the wreckage of Isengard.
Hasufel was already saddled. Legolas and Gimli with their horse
stood close by.
‘So four of the Company still remain,’ said Aragorn. ‘We will ride
on together. But we shall not go alone, as I thought. The king is now
determined to set out at once. Since the coming of the winged
shadow, he desires to return to the hills under cover of night.’
‘And then whither?’ said Legolas.
‘I cannot say yet,’ Aragorn answered. ‘As for the king, he will go
to the muster that he commanded at Edoras, four nights from now.
And there, I think, he will hear tidings of war, and the Riders of
Rohan will go down to Minas Tirith. But for myself, and any that
will go with me . . .’
‘I for one!’ cried Legolas. ‘And Gimli with him!’ said the Dwarf.
‘Well, for myself,’ said Aragorn, ‘it is dark before me. I must go
down also to Minas Tirith, but I do not yet see the road. An hour
long prepared approaches.’
‘Don’t leave me behind!’ said Merry. ‘I have not been of much
use yet; but I don’t want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called
for when all is over. I don’t think the Riders will want to be bothered
with me now. Though, of course, the king did say that I was to sit
by him when he came to his house and tell him all about the Shire.’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘and your road lies with him, I think, Merry.
But do not look for mirth at the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere
Théoden sits at ease again in Meduseld. Many hopes will wither in
this bitter Spring.’
Soon all were ready to depart: twenty-four horses, with Gimli
behind Legolas, and Merry in front of Aragorn. Presently they were
riding swiftly through the night. They had not long passed the
mounds at the Fords of Isen, when a Rider galloped up from the
rear of their line.
‘My lord,’ he said to the king, ‘there are horsemen behind us. As

776

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and see how it was! And there are caves, Merry, caves of wonder!
Shall we visit them, Legolas, do you think?’
‘Nay! There is no time,’ said the Elf. ‘Do not spoil the wonder
with haste! I have given you my word to return hither with you, if a
day of peace and freedom comes again. But it is now near to noon,
and at that hour we eat, and then set out again, I hear.’
Merry got up and yawned. His few hours’ sleep had not been
nearly enough; he was tired and rather dismal. He missed Pippin,
and felt that he was only a burden, while everybody was making plans
for speed in a business that he did not fully understand. ‘Where is
Aragorn?’ he asked.
‘In a high chamber of the Burg,’ said Legolas. ‘He has neither
rested nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that
he must take thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with
him; but some dark doubt or care sits on him.’
‘They are a strange company, these newcomers,’ said Gimli. ‘Stout
men and lordly they are, and the Riders of Rohan look almost as
boys beside them; for they are grim men of face, worn like weathered
rocks for the most part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.’
‘But even as Aragorn they are courteous, if they break their silence,’
said Legolas. ‘And have you marked the brethren Elladan and
Elrohir? Less sombre is their gear than the others’, and they are fair
and gallant as Elven-lords; and that is not to be wondered at in the
sons of Elrond of Rivendell.’
‘Why have they come? Have you heard?’ asked Merry. He had
now dressed, and he ﬂung his grey cloak about his shoulders; and
the three passed out together towards the ruined gate of the Burg.
‘They answered a summons, as you heard,’ said Gimli. ‘Word
came to Rivendell, they say: Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the
Dúnedain ride to him in Rohan! But whence this message came they
are now in doubt. Gandalf sent it, I would guess.’
‘Nay, Galadriel,’ said Legolas. ‘Did she not speak through Gandalf
of the ride of the Grey Company from the North?’
‘Yes, you have it,’ said Gimli. ‘The Lady of the Wood! She read
many hearts and desires. Now why did not we wish for some of our
own kinsfolk, Legolas?’
Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away
north and east, and his fair face was troubled. ‘I do not think that
any would come,’ he answered. ‘They have no need to ride to war;
war already marches on their own lands.’
For a while the three companions walked together, speaking of
this and that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken
gate, and passed the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside

780

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘And now our fates are woven together,’ said Aragorn. ‘And yet,
alas! here we must part. Well, I must eat a little, and then we also
must hasten away. Come, Legolas and Gimli! I must speak with you
as I eat.’
Together they went back into the Burg; yet for some time Aragorn
sat silent at the table in the hall, and the others waited for him to
speak. ‘Come!’ said Legolas at last. ‘Speak and be comforted, and
shake off the shadow! What has happened since we came back to
this grim place in the grey morning?’
‘A struggle somewhat grimmer for my part than the battle of the
Hornburg,’ answered Aragorn. ‘I have looked in the Stone of
Orthanc, my friends.’
‘You have looked in that accursed stone of wizardry!’ exclaimed
Gimli with fear and astonishment in his face. ‘Did you say aught to
– him? Even Gandalf feared that encounter.’
‘You forget to whom you speak,’ said Aragorn sternly, and his
eyes glinted. ‘What do you fear that I should say to him? Did I not
openly proclaim my title before the doors of Edoras? Nay, Gimli,’
he said in a softer voice, and the grimness left his face, and he looked
like one who has laboured in sleepless pain for many nights. ‘Nay,
my friends, I am the lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the
right and the strength to use it, or so I judged. The right cannot be
doubted. The strength was enough – barely.’
He drew a deep breath. ‘It was a bitter struggle, and the weariness
is slow to pass. I spoke no word to him, and in the end I wrenched
the Stone to my own will. That alone he will ﬁnd hard to endure.
And he beheld me. Yes, Master Gimli, he saw me, but in other guise
than you see me here. If that will aid him, then I have done ill. But
I do not think so. To know that I lived and walked the earth was a
blow to his heart, I deem; for he knew it not till now. The eyes in
Orthanc did not see through the armour of Théoden; but Sauron
has not forgotten Isildur and the sword of Elendil. Now in the very
hour of his great designs the heir of Isildur and the Sword are revealed;
for I showed the blade re-forged to him. He is not so mighty yet that
he is above fear; nay, doubt ever gnaws him.’
‘But he wields great dominion, nonetheless,’ said Gimli; ‘and now
he will strike more swiftly.’
‘The hasty stroke goes oft astray,’ said Aragorn. ‘We must press
our Enemy, and no longer wait upon him for the move. See my
friends, when I had mastered the Stone, I learned many things. A
grave peril I saw coming unlooked-for upon Gondor from the South
that will draw off great strength from the defence of Minas Tirith. If
it is not countered swiftly, I deem that the City will be lost ere ten
days be gone.’

THE MUSTER OF ROHAN

793

In the deepening dusk they came down into the valley. Here the
Snowbourn ﬂowed near to the western walls of the dale, and soon
the path led them to a ford where the shallow waters murmured
loudly on the stones. The ford was guarded. As the king approached
many men sprang up out of the shadow of the rocks; and when they
saw the king they cried with glad voices: ‘Théoden King! Théoden
King! The King of the Mark returns!’
Then one blew a long call on a horn. It echoed in the valley. Other
horns answered it, and lights shone out across the river.
And suddenly there rose a great chorus of trumpets from high
above, sounding from some hollow place, as it seemed, that gathered
their notes into one voice and sent it rolling and beating on the walls
of stone.
So the King of the Mark came back victorious out of the West to
Dunharrow beneath the feet of the White Mountains. There he found
the remaining strength of his people already assembled; for as soon
as his coming was known captains rode to meet him at the ford,
bearing messages from Gandalf. Dúnhere, chieftain of the folk of
Harrowdale, was at their head.
‘At dawn three days ago, lord,’ he said, ‘Shadowfax came like a
wind out of the West to Edoras, and Gandalf brought tidings of your
victory to gladden our hearts. But he brought also word from you
to hasten the gathering of the Riders. And then came the winged
Shadow.’
‘The winged Shadow?’ said Théoden. ‘We saw it also, but that
was in the dead of night before Gandalf left us.’
‘Maybe, lord,’ said Dúnhere. ‘Yet the same, or another like to it,
a ﬂying darkness in the shape of a monstrous bird, passed over Edoras
that morning, and all men were shaken with fear. For it stooped upon
Meduseld, and as it came low, almost to the gable, there came a cry
that stopped our hearts. Then it was that Gandalf counselled us not
to assemble in the ﬁelds, but to meet you here in the valley under
the mountains. And he bade us to kindle no more lights or ﬁres than
barest need asked. So it has been done. Gandalf spoke with great
authority. We trust that it is as you would wish. Naught has been
seen in Harrowdale of these evil things.’
‘It is well,’ said Théoden. ‘I will ride now to the Hold, and there
before I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them
come to me as soon as may be!’
The road now led eastward straight across the valley, which was at
that point little more than half a mile in width. Flats and meads of
rough grass, grey now in the falling night, lay all about, but in front
on the far side of the dale Merry saw a frowning wall, a last outlier

796

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Tell me, did he speak of that road?’ He pointed away along the
darkening lines of stones towards the Dwimorberg. ‘Of the Paths of
the Dead?’
´
‘Yes, lord,’ said Eowyn.
‘And he has passed into the shadow from
which none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.’
´
‘Then our paths are sundered,’ said Eomer.
‘He is lost. We must
ride without him, and our hope dwindles.’
Slowly they passed through the short heath and upland grass,
speaking no more, until they came to the king’s pavilion. There Merry
found that everything was made ready, and that he himself was not
forgotten. A little tent had been pitched for him beside the king’s
lodging; and there he sat alone, while men passed to and fro, going
in to the king and taking counsel with him. Night came on and the
half-seen heads of the mountains westward were crowned with stars,
but the East was dark and blank. The marching stones faded slowly
from sight, but still beyond them, blacker than the gloom, brooded
the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg.
‘The Paths of the Dead,’ he muttered to himself. ‘The Paths of
the Dead? What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They
have all gone to some doom: Gandalf and Pippin to war in the East;
and Sam and Frodo to Mordor; and Strider and Legolas and Gimli
to the Paths of the Dead. But my turn will come soon enough, I
suppose. I wonder what they are all talking about, and what the king
means to do. For I must go where he goes now.’
In the midst of these gloomy thoughts he suddenly remembered
that he was very hungry, and he got up to go and see if anyone else
in this strange camp felt the same. But at that very moment a trumpet
sounded, and a man came summoning him, the king’s esquire, to
wait at the king’s board.
In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space, curtained off
with broidered hangings, and strewn with skins; and there at a small
´
´
table sat Théoden with Eomer
and Eowyn,
and Dúnhere, lord of
Harrowdale. Merry stood beside the king’s stool and waited on him,
till presently the old man, coming out of deep thought, turned to
him and smiled.
‘Come, Master Meriadoc!’ he said. ‘You shall not stand. You shall
sit beside me, as long as I remain in my own lands, and lighten my
heart with tales.’
Room was made for the hobbit at the king’s left hand, but no one
called for any tale. There was indeed little speech, and they ate and
drank for the most part in silence, until at last, plucking up courage,
Merry asked the question that was tormenting him.

THE MUSTER OF ROHAN

799

trembled. ‘The Red Arrow has not been seen in the Mark in all my
years! Has it indeed come to that? And what does the Lord Denethor
reckon that all my strength and all my speed may be?’
‘That is best known to yourself, lord,’ said Hirgon. ‘But ere long
it may well come to pass that Minas Tirith is surrounded, and unless
you have the strength to break a siege of many powers, the Lord
Denethor bids me say that he judges that the strong arms of the
Rohirrim would be better within his walls than without.’
‘But he knows that we are a people who ﬁght rather upon horseback and in the open, and that we are also a scattered people and
time is needed for the gathering of our Riders. Is it not true, Hirgon,
that the Lord of Minas Tirith knows more than he sets in his message?
For we are already at war, as you may have seen, and you do not
ﬁnd us all unprepared. Gandalf the Grey has been among us, and
even now we are mustering for battle in the East.’
‘What the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things
I cannot say,’ answered Hirgon. ‘But indeed our case is desperate.
My lord does not issue any command to you, he begs you only to
remember old friendship and oaths long spoken, and for your own
good to do all that you may. It is reported to us that many kings
have ridden in from the East to the service of Mordor. From the
North to the ﬁeld of Dagorlad there is skirmish and rumour of war.
In the South the Haradrim are moving, and fear has fallen on all our
coastlands, so that little help will come to us thence. Make haste!
For it is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time
will be decided, and if the tide be not stemmed there, then it will
ﬂow over all the fair ﬁelds of Rohan, and even in this Hold among
the hills there shall be no refuge.’
‘Dark tidings,’ said Théoden, ‘yet not all unguessed. But say to
Denethor that even if Rohan itself felt no peril, still we would come
to his aid. But we have suffered much loss in our battles with Saruman
the traitor, and we must still think of our frontier to the north and
east, as his own tidings make clear. So great a power as the Dark
Lord seems now to wield might well contain us in battle before the
City and yet strike with great force across the River away beyond the
Gate of Kings.
‘But we will speak no longer counsels of prudence. We will come.
The weapontake was set for the morrow. When all is ordered we will
set out. Ten thousand spears I might have sent riding over the plain
to the dismay of your foes. It will be less now, I fear; for I will not
leave my strongholds all unguarded. Yet six thousands at the least
shall ride behind me. For say to Denethor that in this hour the King
of the Mark himself will come down to the land of Gondor, though
maybe he will not ride back. But it is a long road, and man and beast

Chapter 4
THE SIEGE OF GONDOR
Pippin was roused by Gandalf. Candles were lit in their chamber,
for only a dim twilight came through the windows; the air was heavy
as with approaching thunder.
‘What is the time?’ said Pippin yawning.
‘Past the second hour,’ said Gandalf. ‘Time to get up and make
yourself presentable. You are summoned to the Lord of the City to
learn your new duties.’
‘And will he provide breakfast?’
‘No! I have provided it: all that you will get till noon. Food is now
doled out by order.’
Pippin looked ruefully at the small loaf and (he thought) very
inadequate pat of butter which was set out for him, beside a cup of
thin milk. ‘Why did you bring me here?’ he said.
‘You know quite well,’ said Gandalf. ‘To keep you out of mischief;
and if you do not like being here, you can remember that you brought
it on yourself.’ Pippin said no more.
Before long he was walking with Gandalf once more down the
cold corridor to the door of the Tower Hall. There Denethor sat in
a grey gloom, like an old patient spider, Pippin thought; he did not
seem to have moved since the day before. He beckoned Gandalf to
a seat, but Pippin was left for a while standing unheeded. Presently
the old man turned to him:
‘Well, Master Peregrin, I hope that you used yesterday to your
proﬁt, and to your liking? Though I fear that the board is barer in
this city than you could wish.’
Pippin had an uncomfortable feeling that most of what he had
said or done was somehow known to the Lord of the City, and much
was guessed of what he thought as well. He did not answer.
‘What would you do in my service?’
‘I thought, sir, that you would tell me my duties.’
‘I will, when I learn what you are ﬁt for,’ said Denethor. ‘But that
I shall learn soonest, maybe, if I keep you beside me. The esquire of
my chamber has begged leave to go to the out-garrison, so you shall
take his place for a while. You shall wait on me, bear errands, and
talk to me, if war and council leave me any leisure. Can you sing?’
‘Yes,’ said Pippin. ‘Well, yes, well enough for my own people. But
we have no songs ﬁt for great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

807

sing of anything more terrible than wind or rain. And most of my
songs are about things that make us laugh; or about food and drink,
of course.’
‘And why should such songs be unﬁt for my halls, or for such
hours as these? We who have lived long under the Shadow may surely
listen to echoes from a land untroubled by it? Then we may feel that
our vigil was not fruitless, though it may have been thankless.’
Pippin’s heart sank. He did not relish the idea of singing any song
of the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic ones
that he knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an occasion.
He was however spared the ordeal for the present. He was not commanded to sing. Denethor turned to Gandalf, asking questions about
´
the Rohirrim and their policies, and the position of Eomer,
the king’s
nephew. Pippin marvelled at the amount that the Lord seemed to
know about a people that lived far away, though it must, he thought,
be many years since Denethor himself had ridden abroad.
Presently Denethor waved to Pippin and dismissed him again for
a while. ‘Go to the armouries of the Citadel,’ he said, ‘and get you
there the livery and gear of the Tower. It will be ready. It was commanded yesterday. Return when you are clad!’
It was as he said; and Pippin soon found himself arrayed in strange
garments, all of black and silver. He had a small hauberk, its rings
forged of steel, maybe, yet black as jet; and a high-crowned helm
with small raven-wings on either side, set with a silver star in the
centre of the circlet. Above the mail was a short surcoat of black, but
broidered on the breast in silver with the token of the Tree. His old
clothes were folded and put away, but he was permitted to keep the
grey cloak of Lórien, though not to wear it when on duty. He looked
now, had he known it, verily Ernil i Pheriannath, the Prince of the
Halﬂings, that folk had called him; but he felt uncomfortable. And
the gloom began to weigh on his spirits.
It was dark and dim all day. From the sunless dawn until evening
the heavy shadow had deepened, and all hearts in the City were
oppressed. Far above a great cloud streamed slowly westward from
the Black Land, devouring light, borne upon a wind of war; but
below the air was still and breathless, as if all the Vale of Anduin
waited for the onset of a ruinous storm.
About the eleventh hour, released at last for a while from service,
Pippin came out and went in search of food and drink to cheer his
heavy heart and make his task of waiting more supportable. In the
messes he met Beregond again, who had just come from an errand
over the Pelennor out to the Guard-towers upon the Causeway.
Together they strolled out to the walls; for Pippin felt imprisoned

808

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

indoors, and stiﬂed even in the lofty citadel. Now they sat side by
side again in the embrasure looking eastward, where they had eaten
and talked the day before.
It was the sunset-hour, but the great pall had now stretched far
into the West, and only as it sank at last into the Sea did the Sun
escape to send out a brief farewell gleam before the night, even as
Frodo saw it at the Cross-roads touching the head of the fallen king.
But to the ﬁelds of the Pelennor, under the shadow of Mindolluin,
there came no gleam: they were brown and drear.
Already it seemed years to Pippin since he had sat there before,
in some half-forgotten time when he had still been a hobbit, a lighthearted wanderer touched little by the perils he had passed through.
Now he was one small soldier in a city preparing for a great assault,
clad in the proud but sombre manner of the Tower of Guard.
In some other time and place Pippin might have been pleased with
his new array, but he knew now that he was taking part in no play; he
was in deadly earnest the servant of a grim master in the greatest peril.
The hauberk was burdensome, and the helm weighed upon his head.
His cloak he had cast aside upon the seat. He turned his tired gaze away
from the darkling ﬁelds below and yawned, and then he sighed.
‘You are weary of this day?’ said Beregond.
‘Yes,’ said Pippin, ‘very: tired out with idleness and waiting. I have
kicked my heels at the door of my master’s chamber for many slow
hours, while he has debated with Gandalf and the Prince and other
great persons. And I’m not used, Master Beregond, to waiting hungry
on others while they eat. It is a sore trial for a hobbit, that. No doubt
you will think I should feel the honour more deeply. But what is the
good of such honour? Indeed what is the good even of food and drink
under this creeping shadow? What does it mean? The very air seems
thick and brown! Do you often have such glooms when the wind is
in the East?’
‘Nay,’ said Beregond, ‘this is no weather of the world. This is
some device of his malice; some broil of fume from the Mountain of
Fire that he sends to darken hearts and counsel. And so it doth
indeed. I wish the Lord Faramir would return. He would not be
dismayed. But now, who knows if he will ever come back across the
River out of the Darkness?’
‘Yes,’ said Pippin, ‘Gandalf, too, is anxious. He was disappointed,
I think, not to ﬁnd Faramir here. And where has he got to himself ?
He left the Lord’s council before the noon-meal, and in no good
mood either, I thought. Perhaps he has some foreboding of bad news.’
Suddenly as they talked they were stricken dumb, frozen as it were
to listening stones. Pippin cowered down with his hands pressed to

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

809

his ears; but Beregond, who had been looking out from the battlement
as he spoke of Faramir, remained there, stiffened, staring out with
starting eyes. Pippin knew the shuddering cry that he had heard: it
was the same that he had heard long ago in the Marish of the Shire,
but now it was grown in power and hatred, piercing the heart with
a poisonous despair.
At last Beregond spoke with an effort. ‘They have come!’ he said.
‘Take courage and look! There are fell things below.’
Reluctantly Pippin climbed on to the seat and looked out over the
wall. The Pelennor lay dim beneath him, fading away to the scarce
guessed line of the Great River. But now wheeling swiftly across it,
like shadows of untimely night, he saw in the middle airs below him
ﬁve birdlike forms, horrible as carrion-fowl yet greater than eagles,
cruel as death. Now they swooped near, venturing almost within
bowshot of the walls, now they circled away.
‘Black Riders!’ muttered Pippin. ‘Black Riders of the air! But see,
Beregond!’ he cried. ‘They are looking for something, surely? See
how they wheel and swoop, always down to that point over there!
And can you see something moving on the ground? Dark little things.
Yes, men on horses: four or ﬁve. Ah! I cannot stand it! Gandalf !
Gandalf save us!’
Another long screech rose and fell, and he threw himself back
again from the wall, panting like a hunted animal. Faint and seemingly remote through that shuddering cry he heard winding up from
below the sound of a trumpet ending on a long high note.
‘Faramir! The Lord Faramir! It is his call!’ cried Beregond. ‘Brave
heart! But how can he win to the Gate, if these foul hell-hawks have
other weapons than fear? But look! They hold on. They will make
the Gate. No! the horses are running mad. Look! the men are thrown;
they are running on foot. No, one is still up, but he rides back to the
others. That will be the Captain: he can master both beasts and men.
Ah! there one of the foul things is stooping on him. Help! help! Will
no one go out to him? Faramir!’
With that Beregond sprang away and ran off into the gloom.
Ashamed of his terror, while Beregond of the Guard thought ﬁrst of
the captain whom he loved, Pippin got up and peered out. At that
moment he caught a ﬂash of white and silver coming from the North,
like a small star down on the dusky ﬁelds. It moved with the speed
of an arrow and grew as it came, converging swiftly with the ﬂight
of the four men towards the Gate. It seemed to Pippin that a pale
light was spread about it and the heavy shadows gave way before it;
and then as it drew near he thought that he heard, like an echo in
the walls, a great voice calling.
‘Gandalf !’ he cried. ‘Gandalf ! He always turns up when things

810

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

are darkest. Go on! Go on, White Rider! Gandalf, Gandalf !’ he
shouted wildly, like an onlooker at a great race urging on a runner
who is far beyond encouragement.
But now the dark swooping shadows were aware of the newcomer.
One wheeled towards him; but it seemed to Pippin that he raised his
hand, and from it a shaft of white light stabbed upwards. The Nazgûl
gave a long wailing cry and swerved away; and with that the four
others wavered, and then rising in swift spirals they passed away
eastward vanishing into the lowering cloud above; and down on the
Pelennor it seemed for a while less dark.
Pippin watched, and he saw the horseman and the White Rider
meet and halt, waiting for those on foot. Men now hurried out to
them from the City; and soon they all passed from sight under the
outer walls, and he knew that they were entering the Gate. Guessing
that they would come at once to the Tower and the Steward, he
hurried to the entrance of the citadel. There he was joined by many
others who had watched the race and the rescue from the high walls.
It was not long before a clamour was heard in the streets leading
up from the outer circles, and there was much cheering and crying
of the names of Faramir and Mithrandir. Presently Pippin saw
torches, and followed by a press of people two horsemen riding
slowly: one was in white but shining no longer, pale in the twilight
as if his ﬁre was spent or veiled; the other was dark and his head was
bowed. They dismounted, and as grooms took Shadowfax and the
other horse, they walked forward to the sentinel at the gate: Gandalf
steadily, his grey cloak ﬂung back, and a ﬁre still smouldering in his
eyes; the other, clad all in green, slowly, swaying a little as a weary
or a wounded man.
Pippin pressed forward as they passed under the lamp beneath the
gate-arch, and when he saw the pale face of Faramir he caught his
breath. It was the face of one who has been assailed by a great fear
or anguish, but has mastered it and now is quiet. Proud and grave
he stood for a moment as he spoke to the guard, and Pippin gazing
at him saw how closely he resembled his brother Boromir – whom
Pippin had liked from the ﬁrst, admiring the great man’s lordly but
kindly manner. Yet suddenly for Faramir his heart was strangely
moved with a feeling that he had not known before. Here was one
with an air of high nobility such as Aragorn at times revealed, less
high perhaps, yet also less incalculable and remote: one of the Kings
of Men born into a later time, but touched with the wisdom and
sadness of the Elder Race. He knew now why Beregond spoke his
name with love. He was a captain that men would follow, that he
would follow, even under the shadow of the black wings.
‘Faramir!’ he cried aloud with the others. ‘Faramir!’ And Faramir,

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

811

catching his strange voice among the clamour of the men of the City,
turned and looked down at him and was amazed.
‘Whence come you?’ he said. ‘A halﬂing, and in the livery of the
Tower! Whence...?’
But with that Gandalf stepped to his side and spoke. ‘He came
with me from the land of the Halﬂings,’ he said. ‘He came with me.
But let us not tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you
are weary. He shall come with us. Indeed he must, for if he does not
forget his new duties more easily than I do, he must attend on his
lord again within this hour. Come, Pippin, follow us!’
So at length they came to the private chamber of the Lord of the
City. There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal; and wine
was brought; and there Pippin, hardly noticed, stood behind the chair
of Denethor and felt his weariness little, so eagerly did he listen to
all that was said.
When Faramir had taken white bread and drunk a draught of
wine, he sat upon a low chair at his father’s left hand. Removed a
little upon the other side sat Gandalf in a chair of carven wood; and
he seemed at ﬁrst to be asleep. For at the beginning Faramir spoke
only of the errand upon which he had been sent out ten days before,
and he brought tidings of Ithilien and of movements of the Enemy
and his allies; and he told of the ﬁght on the road when the men of
Harad and their great beast were overthrown: a captain reporting to
his master such matters as had often been heard before, small things
of border-war that now seemed useless and petty, shorn of their
renown.
Then suddenly Faramir looked at Pippin. ‘But now we come to
strange matters,’ he said. ‘For this is not the ﬁrst halﬂing that I have
seen walking out of northern legends into the Southlands.’
At that Gandalf sat up and gripped the arms of his chair; but he
said nothing, and with a look stopped the exclamation on Pippin’s
lips. Denethor looked at their faces and nodded his head, as though in
sign that he had read much there before it was spoken. Slowly, while
the others sat silent and still, Faramir told his tale, with his eyes for
the most part on Gandalf, though now and again his glance strayed to
Pippin, as if to refresh his memory of others that he had seen.
As his story was unfolded of his meeting with Frodo and his servant
and of the events at Henneth Annûn, Pippin became aware that
Gandalf ’s hands were trembling as they clutched the carven wood.
White they seemed now and very old, and as he looked at them,
suddenly with a thrill of fear Pippin knew that Gandalf, Gandalf
himself, was troubled, even afraid. The air of the room was close and
still. At last when Faramir spoke of his parting with the travellers,

812

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and of their resolve to go to Cirith Ungol, his voice fell, and he shook
his head and sighed. Then Gandalf sprang up.
‘Cirith Ungol? Morgul Vale?’ he said. ‘The time, Faramir, the
time? When did you part with them? When would they reach that
accursed valley?’
‘I parted with them in the morning two days ago,’ said Faramir.
‘It is ﬁfteen leagues thence to the vale of the Morgulduin, if they
went straight south; and then they would be still ﬁve leagues westward
of the accursed Tower. At swiftest they could not come there before
today, and maybe they have not come there yet. Indeed I see what
you fear. But the darkness is not due to their venture. It began
yestereve, and all Ithilien was under shadow last night. It is clear to
me that the Enemy has long planned an assault on us, and its hour had
already been determined before ever the travellers left my keeping.’
Gandalf paced the ﬂoor. ‘The morning of two days ago, nigh on
three days of journey! How far is the place where you parted?’
‘Some twenty-ﬁve leagues as a bird ﬂies,’ answered Faramir. ‘But
I could not come more swiftly. Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the
long isle in the River northward which we hold in defence; and horses
are kept on the hither bank. As the dark drew on I knew that haste
was needed, so I rode thence with three others that could also be
horsed. The rest of my company I sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath. I hope that I have not done ill?’ He
looked at his father.
‘Ill?’ cried Denethor, and his eyes ﬂashed suddenly. ‘Why do you
ask? The men were under your command. Or do you ask for my
judgement on all your deeds? Your bearing is lowly in my presence,
yet it is long now since you turned from your own way at my counsel.
See, you have spoken skilfully, as ever; but I, have I not seen your
eye ﬁxed on Mithrandir, seeking whether you said well or too much?
He has long had your heart in his keeping.
‘My son, your father is old but not yet dotard. I can see and hear,
as was my wont; and little of what you have half said or left unsaid
is now hidden from me. I know the answer to many riddles. Alas,
alas for Boromir!’
‘If what I have done displeases you, my father,’ said Faramir
quietly, ‘I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so
weighty a judgement was thrust on me.’
‘Would that have availed to change your judgement?’ said
Denethor. ‘You would still have done just so, I deem. I know you
well. Ever your desire is to appear lordly and generous as a king of
old, gracious, gentle. That may well beﬁt one of high race, if he sits
in power and peace. But in desperate hours gentleness may be repaid
with death.’

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

813

‘So be it,’ said Faramir.
‘So be it!’ cried Denethor. ‘But not with your death only, Lord
Faramir: with the death also of your father, and of all your people,
whom it is your part to protect now that Boromir is gone.’
‘Do you wish then,’ said Faramir, ‘that our places had been
exchanged?’
‘Yes, I wish that indeed,’ said Denethor. ‘For Boromir was loyal
to me and no wizard’s pupil. He would have remembered his father’s
need, and would not have squandered what fortune gave. He would
have brought me a mighty gift.’
For a moment Faramir’s restraint gave way. ‘I would ask you, my
father, to remember why it was that I, not he, was in Ithilien. On
one occasion at least your counsel has prevailed, not long ago. It was
the Lord of the City that gave the errand to him.’
‘Stir not the bitterness in the cup that I mixed for myself,’ said
Denethor. ‘Have I not tasted it now many nights upon my tongue,
foreboding that worse yet lay in the dregs? As now indeed I ﬁnd.
Would it were not so! Would that this thing had come to me!’
‘Comfort yourself !’ said Gandalf. ‘In no case would Boromir have
brought it to you. He is dead, and died well; may he sleep in peace!
Yet you deceive yourself. He would have stretched out his hand to
this thing, and taking it he would have fallen. He would have kept
it for his own, and when he returned you would not have known
your son.’
The face of Denethor set hard and cold. ‘You found Boromir less
apt to your hand, did you not?’ he said softly. ‘But I who was his
father say that he would have brought it to me. You are wise, maybe,
Mithrandir, yet with all your subtleties you have not all wisdom.
Counsels may be found that are neither the webs of wizards nor the
haste of fools. I have in this matter more lore and wisdom than you
deem.’
‘What then is your wisdom?’ said Gandalf.
‘Enough to perceive that there are two follies to avoid. To use this
thing is perilous. At this hour, to send it in the hands of a witless
halﬂing into the land of the Enemy himself, as you have done, and
this son of mine, that is madness.’
‘And the Lord Denethor what would he have done?’
‘Neither. But most surely not for any argument would he have set
this thing at a hazard beyond all but a fool’s hope, risking our utter
ruin, if the Enemy should recover what he lost. Nay, it should have
been kept, hidden, hidden dark and deep. Not used, I say, unless at
the uttermost end of need, but set beyond his grasp, save by a victory
so ﬁnal that what then befell would not trouble us, being dead.’
‘You think, as is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only,’ said

814

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gandalf. ‘Yet there are other men and other lives, and time still to
be. And for me, I pity even his slaves.’
‘And where will other men look for help, if Gondor falls?’ answered
Denethor. ‘If I had this thing now in the deep vaults of this citadel,
we should not then shake with dread under this gloom, fearing the
worst, and our counsels would be undisturbed. If you do not trust
me to endure the test, you do not know me yet.’
‘Nonetheless I do not trust you,’ said Gandalf. ‘Had I done so, I
could have sent this thing hither to your keeping and spared myself
and others much anguish. And now hearing you speak I trust you
less, no more than Boromir. Nay, stay your wrath! I do not trust
myself in this, and I refused this thing, even as a freely given gift. You
are strong and can still in some matters govern yourself, Denethor; yet
if you had received this thing, it would have overthrown you. Were
it buried beneath the roots of Mindolluin, still it would burn your
mind away, as the darkness grows, and the yet worse things follow
that soon shall come upon us.’
For a moment the eyes of Denethor glowed again as he faced
Gandalf, and Pippin felt once more the strain between their wills;
but now almost it seemed as if their glances were like blades from
eye to eye, ﬂickering as they fenced. Pippin trembled fearing some
dreadful stroke. But suddenly Denethor relaxed and grew cold again.
He shrugged his shoulders.
‘If I had! If you had!’ he said. ‘Such words and ifs are vain. It has
gone into the Shadow, and only time will show what doom awaits
it, and us. The time will not be long. In what is left, let all who ﬁght
the Enemy in their fashion be at one, and keep hope while they may,
and after hope still the hardihood to die free.’ He turned to Faramir.
‘What think you of the garrison at Osgiliath?’
‘It is not strong,’ said Faramir. ‘I have sent the company of Ithilien
to strengthen it, as I have said.’
‘Not enough, I deem,’ said Denethor. ‘It is there that the ﬁrst
blow will fall. They will have need of some stout captain there.’
‘There and elsewhere in many places,’ said Faramir, and sighed.
‘Alas for my brother, whom I too loved!’ He rose. ‘May I have your
leave, father?’ And then he swayed and leaned upon his father’s chair.
‘You are weary, I see,’ said Denethor. ‘You have ridden fast and
far, and under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.’
‘Let us not speak of that!’ said Faramir.
‘Then we will not,’ said Denethor. ‘Go now and rest as you may.
Tomorrow’s need will be sterner.’
All now took leave of the Lord of the City and went to rest while
they still could. Outside there was a starless blackness as Gandalf,

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

815

with Pippin beside him bearing a small torch, made his way to their
lodging. They did not speak until they were behind closed doors.
Then at last Pippin took Gandalf ’s hand.
‘Tell me,’ he said, ‘is there any hope? For Frodo, I mean; or at
least mostly for Frodo.’
Gandalf put his hand on Pippin’s head. ‘There never was much
hope,’ he answered. ‘Just a fool’s hope, as I have been told. And
when I heard of Cirith Ungol——’ He broke off and strode to the
window, as if his eyes could pierce the night in the East. ‘Cirith
Ungol!’ he muttered. ‘Why that way, I wonder?’ He turned. ‘Just
now, Pippin, my heart almost failed me, hearing that name. And yet in
truth I believe that the news that Faramir brings has some hope in it.
For it seems clear that our Enemy has opened his war at last and made
the ﬁrst move while Frodo was still free. So now for many days he will
have his eye turned this way and that, away from his own land. And
yet, Pippin, I feel from afar his haste and fear. He has begun sooner
than he would. Something has happened to stir him.’
Gandalf stood for a moment in thought. ‘Maybe,’ he muttered.
‘Maybe even your foolishness helped, my lad. Let me see: some ﬁve
days ago now he would discover that we had thrown down Saruman,
and had taken the Stone. Still what of that? We could not use it to
much purpose, or without his knowing. Ah! I wonder. Aragorn? His
time draws near. And he is strong and stern underneath, Pippin;
bold, determined, able to take his own counsel and dare great risks
at need. That may be it. He may have used the Stone and shown
himself to the Enemy, challenging him, for this very purpose. I
wonder. Well, we shall not know the answer till the Riders of Rohan
come, if they do not come too late. There are evil days ahead. To
sleep while we may!’
‘But,’ said Pippin.
‘But what?’ said Gandalf. ‘Only one but will I allow tonight.’
‘Gollum,’ said Pippin. ‘How on earth could they be going about
with him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not
like the place he was taking them to any more than you do. What is
wrong?’
‘I cannot answer that now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Yet my heart guessed
that Frodo and Gollum would meet before the end. For good, or for
evil. But of Cirith Ungol I will not speak tonight. Treachery, treachery
I fear; treachery of that miserable creature. But so it must be. Let us
remember that a traitor may betray himself and do good that he does
not intend. It can be so, sometimes. Good night!’
The next day came with a morning like a brown dusk, and the
hearts of men, lifted for a while by the return of Faramir, sank low

816

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

again. The winged Shadows were not seen again that day, yet ever
and anon, high above the city, a faint cry would come, and many
who heard it would stand stricken with a passing dread, while the
less stout-hearted quailed and wept.
And now Faramir was gone again. ‘They give him no rest,’ some
murmured. ‘The Lord drives his son too hard, and now he must do
the duty of two, for himself and for the one that will not return.’
And ever men looked northward, asking: ‘Where are the Riders of
Rohan?’
In truth Faramir did not go by his own choosing. But the Lord
of the City was master of his Council, and he was in no mood that
day to bow to others. Early in the morning the Council had been
summoned. There all the captains judged that because of the threat
in the South their force was too weak to make any stroke of war on
their own part, unless perchance the Riders of Rohan yet should
come. Meanwhile they must man the walls and wait.
‘Yet,’ said Denethor, ‘we should not lightly abandon the outer
defences, the Rammas made with so great a labour. And the Enemy
must pay dearly for the crossing of the River. That he cannot do, in
force to assail the City, either north of Cair Andros because of the
marshes, or southwards towards Lebennin because of the breadth of
the River, that needs many boats. It is at Osgiliath that he will put
his weight, as before when Boromir denied him the passage.’
‘That was but a trial,’ said Faramir. ‘Today we may make the
Enemy pay ten times our loss at the passage and yet rue the exchange.
For he can afford to lose a host better than we to lose a company.
And the retreat of those that we put out far aﬁeld will be perilous, if
he wins across in force.’
‘And what of Cair Andros?’ said the Prince. ‘That, too, must be
held, if Osgiliath is defended. Let us not forget the danger on our
left. The Rohirrim may come, and they may not. But Faramir has
told us of great strength drawing ever to the Black Gate. More than
one host may issue from it, and strike for more than one passage.’
‘Much must be risked in war,’ said Denethor. ‘Cair Andros is
manned, and no more can be sent so far. But I will not yield the
River and the Pelennor unfought – not if there is a captain here who
has still the courage to do his lord’s will.’
Then all were silent. But at length Faramir said: ‘I do not oppose
your will, sire. Since you are robbed of Boromir, I will go and do
what I can in his stead – if you command it.’
‘I do so,’ said Denethor.
‘Then farewell!’ said Faramir. ‘But if I should return, think better
of me!’
‘That depends on the manner of your return,’ said Denethor.

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

817

Gandalf it was that last spoke to Faramir ere he rode east. ‘Do
not throw your life away rashly or in bitterness,’ he said. ‘You will
be needed here, for other things than war. Your father loves you,
Faramir, and will remember it ere the end. Farewell!’
So now the Lord Faramir had gone forth again, and had taken with
him such strength of men as were willing to go or could be spared. On
the walls some gazed through the gloom towards the ruined city, and
they wondered what chanced there, for nothing could be seen. And
others, as ever, looked north and counted the leagues to Théoden in
Rohan. ‘Will he come? Will he remember our old alliance?’ they said.
‘Yes, he will come,’ said Gandalf, ‘even if he comes too late. But
think! At best the Red Arrow cannot have reached him more than
two days ago, and the miles are long from Edoras.’
It was night again ere news came. A man rode in haste from the
fords, saying that a host had issued from Minas Morgul and was
already drawing nigh to Osgiliath; and it had been joined by regiments
from the South, Haradrim, cruel and tall. ‘And we have learned,’
said the messenger, ‘that the Black Captain leads them once again,
and the fear of him has passed before him over the River.’
With those ill-boding words the third day closed since Pippin came
to Minas Tirith. Few went to rest, for small hope had any now that
even Faramir could hold the fords for long.
The next day, though the darkness had reached its full and grew
no deeper, it weighed heavier on men’s hearts, and a great dread was
on them. Ill news came soon again. The passage of Anduin was won
by the Enemy. Faramir was retreating to the wall of the Pelennor,
rallying his men to the Causeway Forts; but he was ten times outnumbered.
‘If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on
his heels,’ said the messenger. ‘They have paid dear for the crossing,
but less dearly than we hoped. The plan has been well laid. It is now
seen that in secret they have long been building ﬂoats and barges in
great number in East Osgiliath. They swarmed across like beetles.
But it is the Black Captain that defeats us. Few will stand and abide
even the rumour of his coming. His own folk quail at him, and they
would slay themselves at his bidding.’
‘Then I am needed there more than here,’ said Gandalf, and rode
off at once, and the glimmer of him faded soon from sight. And all
that night Pippin alone and sleepless stood upon the wall and gazed
eastward.
*
*
*

818

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The bells of day had scarcely rung out again, a mockery in the
unlightened dark, when far away he saw ﬁres spring up, across in the
dim spaces where the walls of the Pelennor stood. The watchmen
cried aloud, and all men in the City stood to arms. Now ever and
anon there was a red ﬂash, and slowly through the heavy air dull
rumbles could be heard.
‘They have taken the wall!’ men cried. ‘They are blasting breaches
in it. They are coming!’
‘Where is Faramir?’ cried Beregond in dismay. ‘Say not that he
has fallen!’
It was Gandalf that brought the ﬁrst tidings. With a handful of
horsemen he came in the middle morning, riding as escort to a line
of wains. They were ﬁlled with wounded men, all that could be saved
from the wreck of the Causeway Forts. At once he went to Denethor.
The Lord of the City sat now in a high chamber above the Hall of the
White Tower with Pippin at his side; and through the dim windows,
north and south and east, he bent his dark eyes, as if to pierce the
shadows of doom that ringed him round. Most to the North he
looked, and would pause at whiles to listen as if by some ancient art
his ears might hear the thunder of hoofs on the plains far away.
‘Is Faramir come?’ he asked.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But he still lived when I left him. Yet he is
resolved to stay with the rearguard, lest the retreat over the Pelennor
become a rout. He may, perhaps, hold his men together long enough,
but I doubt it. He is pitted against a foe too great. For one has come
that I feared.’
‘Not – the Dark Lord?’ cried Pippin, forgetting his place in his
terror.
Denethor laughed bitterly. ‘Nay, not yet, Master Peregrin! He will
not come save only to triumph over me when all is won. He uses
others as his weapons. So do all great lords, if they are wise, Master
Halﬂing. Or why should I sit here in my tower and think, and watch,
and wait, spending even my sons? For I can still wield a brand.’
He stood up and cast open his long black cloak, and behold! he
was clad in mail beneath, and girt with a long sword, great-hilted in
a sheath of black and silver. ‘Thus have I walked, and thus now for
many years have I slept,’ he said, ‘lest with age the body should grow
soft and timid.’
‘Yet now under the Lord of Barad-dûr the most fell of all his
captains is already master of your outer walls,’ said Gandalf. ‘King
of Angmar long ago, Sorcerer, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazgûl, a
spear of terror in the hand of Sauron, shadow of despair.’
‘Then, Mithrandir, you had a foe to match you,’ said Denethor.
‘For myself, I have long known who is the chief captain of the hosts

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

819

of the Dark Tower. Is this all that you have returned to say? Or can
it be that you have withdrawn because you are overmatched?’
Pippin trembled, fearing that Gandalf would be stung to sudden
wrath, but his fear was needless. ‘It might be so,’ Gandalf answered
softly. ‘But our trial of strength is not yet come. And if words spoken
of old be true, not by the hand of man shall he fall, and hidden from
the Wise is the doom that awaits him. However that may be, the
Captain of Despair does not press forward, yet. He rules rather
according to the wisdom that you have just spoken, from the rear,
driving his slaves in madness on before.
‘Nay, I came rather to guard the hurt men that can yet be healed;
for the Rammas is breached far and wide, and soon the host of
Morgul will enter in at many points. And I came chieﬂy to say this.
Soon there will be battle on the ﬁelds. A sortie must be made ready.
Let it be of mounted men. In them lies our brief hope, for in one
thing only is the enemy still poorly provided: he has few horsemen.’
‘And we also have few. Now would the coming of Rohan be in
the nick of time,’ said Denethor.
‘We are likely to see other newcomers ﬁrst,’ said Gandalf. ‘Fugitives from Cair Andros have already reached us. The isle has fallen.
Another army is come from the Black Gate, crossing from the
north-east.’
‘Some have accused you, Mithrandir, of delighting to bear ill
news,’ said Denethor, ‘but to me this is no longer news: it was known
to me ere nightfall yesterday. As for the sortie, I had already given
thought to it. Let us go down.’
Time passed. At length watchers on the walls could see the retreat
of the out-companies. Small bands of weary and often wounded men
came ﬁrst with little order; some were running wildly as if pursued.
Away to the eastward the distant ﬁres ﬂickered, and now it seemed
that here and there they crept across the plain. Houses and barns
were burning. Then from many points little rivers of red ﬂame came
hurrying on, winding through the gloom, converging towards the line
of the broad road that led from the City-gate to Osgiliath.
‘The enemy,’ men murmured. ‘The dike is down. Here they come
pouring through the breaches! And they carry torches, it seems.
Where are our own folk?’
It drew now to evening by the hour, and the light was so dim that
even far-sighted men upon the Citadel could discern little clearly out
upon the ﬁelds, save only the burnings that ever multiplied, and the
lines of ﬁre that grew in length and speed. At last, less than a mile
from the City, a more ordered mass of men came into view, marching
not running, still holding together.

820

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The watchers held their breath. ‘Faramir must be there,’ they said.
‘He can govern man and beast. He will make it yet.’
Now the main retreat was scarcely two furlongs distant. Out of
the gloom behind a small company of horsemen galloped, all that
was left of the rearguard. Once again they turned at bay, facing the
oncoming lines of ﬁre. Then suddenly there was a tumult of ﬁerce
cries. Horsemen of the enemy swept up. The lines of ﬁre became
ﬂowing torrents, ﬁle upon ﬁle of Orcs bearing ﬂames, and wild
Southron men with red banners, shouting with harsh tongues, surging
up, overtaking the retreat. And with a piercing cry out of the dim
sky fell the winged shadows, the Nazgûl stooping to the kill.
The retreat became a rout. Already men were breaking away, ﬂying
wild and witless here and there, ﬂinging away their weapons, crying
out in fear, falling to the ground.
And then a trumpet rang from the Citadel, and Denethor at last
released the sortie. Drawn up within the shadow of the Gate and
under the looming walls outside they had waited for his signal: all
the mounted men that were left in the City. Now they sprang forward,
formed, quickened to a gallop, and charged with a great shout. And
from the walls an answering shout went up; for foremost on the ﬁeld
rode the swan-knights of Dol Amroth with their Prince and his blue
banner at their head.
‘Amroth for Gondor!’ they cried. ‘Amroth to Faramir!’
Like thunder they broke upon the enemy on either ﬂank of the
retreat; but one rider outran them all, swift as the wind in the grass:
Shadowfax bore him, shining, unveiled once more, a light starting
from his upraised hand.
The Nazgûl screeched and swept away, for their Captain was not
yet come to challenge the white ﬁre of his foe. The hosts of Morgul
intent on their prey, taken at unawares in wild career, broke, scattering like sparks in a gale. The out-companies with a great cheer
turned and smote their pursuers. Hunters became the hunted. The
retreat became an onslaught. The ﬁeld was strewn with stricken orcs
and men, and a reek arose of torches cast away, sputtering out in
swirling smoke. The cavalry rode on.
But Denethor did not permit them to go far. Though the enemy
was checked, and for the moment driven back, great forces were
ﬂowing in from the East. Again the trumpet rang, sounding the
retreat. The cavalry of Gondor halted. Behind their screen the outcompanies re-formed. Now steadily they came marching back. They
reached the Gate of the City and entered, stepping proudly; and
proudly the people of the City looked on them and cried their praise,
and yet they were troubled in heart. For the companies were grievously

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

821

reduced. Faramir had lost a third of his men. And where was he?
Last of all he came. His men passed in. The mounted knights
returned, and at their rear the banner of Dol Amroth, and the Prince.
And in his arms before him on his horse he bore the body of his
kinsman, Faramir son of Denethor, found upon the stricken ﬁeld.
‘Faramir! Faramir!’ men cried, weeping in the streets. But he did
not answer, and they bore him away up the winding road to the
Citadel and his father. Even as the Nazgûl had swerved aside from
the onset of the White Rider, there came ﬂying a deadly dart, and
Faramir, as he held at bay a mounted champion of Harad, had fallen
to the earth. Only the charge of Dol Amroth had saved him from the
red southland swords that would have hewed him as he lay.
The Prince Imrahil brought Faramir to the White Tower, and he
said: ‘Your son has returned, lord, after great deeds,’ and he told all
that he had seen. But Denethor rose and looked on the face of his
son and was silent. Then he bade them make a bed in the chamber
and lay Faramir upon it and depart. But he himself went up alone
into the secret room under the summit of the Tower; and many who
looked up thither at that time saw a pale light that gleamed and
ﬂickered from the narrow windows for a while, and then ﬂashed and
went out. And when Denethor descended again he went to Faramir
and sat beside him without speaking, but the face of the Lord was
grey, more deathlike than his son’s.
So now at last the City was besieged, enclosed in a ring of foes. The
Rammas was broken, and all the Pelennor abandoned to the Enemy.
The last word to come from outside the walls was brought by men
ﬂying down the northward road ere the Gate was shut. They were
the remnant of the guard that was kept at that point where the way
from Anórien and Rohan ran into the townlands. Ingold led them,
the same who had admitted Gandalf and Pippin less than ﬁve days
before, while the sun still rose and there was hope in the morning.
‘There is no news of the Rohirrim,’ he said. ‘Rohan will not come
now. Or if they come, it will not avail us. The new host that we had
tidings of has come ﬁrst, from over the River by way of Andros, it is
said. They are strong: battalions of Orcs of the Eye, and countless
companies of Men of a new sort that we have not met before. Not
tall, but broad and grim, bearded like dwarves, wielding great axes.
Out of some savage land in the wide East they come, we deem. They
hold the northward road; and many have passed on into Anórien.
The Rohirrim cannot come.’
The Gate was shut. All night watchmen on the walls heard the
rumour of the enemy that roamed outside, burning ﬁeld and tree,

822

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and hewing any man that they found abroad, living or dead. The
numbers that had already passed over the River could not be guessed
in the darkness, but when morning, or its dim shadow, stole over the
plain, it was seen that even fear by night had scarcely over-counted
them. The plain was dark with their marching companies, and as far
as eyes could strain in the mirk there sprouted, like a foul fungusgrowth, all about the beleaguered city great camps of tents, black or
sombre red.
Busy as ants hurrying orcs were digging, digging lines of deep
trenches in a huge ring, just out of bowshot from the walls; and as
the trenches were made each was ﬁlled with ﬁre, though how it was
kindled or fed, by art or devilry, none could see. All day the labour
went forward, while the men of Minas Tirith looked on, unable to
hinder it. And as each length of trench was completed, they could
see great wains approaching; and soon yet more companies of the
enemy were swiftly setting up, each behind the cover of a trench,
great engines for the casting of missiles. There were none upon the
City walls large enough to reach so far or to stay the work.
At ﬁrst men laughed and did not greatly fear such devices. For
the main wall of the City was of great height and marvellous thickness,
built ere the power and craft of Númenor waned in exile; and its
outward face was like to the Tower of Orthanc, hard and dark and
smooth, unconquerable by steel or ﬁre, unbreakable except by some
convulsion that would rend the very earth on which it stood.
‘Nay,’ they said, ‘not if the Nameless One himself should come,
not even he could enter here while we yet live.’ But some answered:
‘While we yet live? How long? He has a weapon that has brought
low many strong places since the world began. Hunger. The roads
are cut. Rohan will not come.’
But the engines did not waste shot upon the indomitable wall. It
was no brigand or orc-chieftain that ordered the assault upon the
Lord of Mordor’s greatest foe. A power and mind of malice guided
it. As soon as the great catapults were set, with many yells and the
creaking of rope and winch, they began to throw missiles marvellously
high, so that they passed right above the battlement and fell thudding
within the ﬁrst circle of the City; and many of them by some secret
art burst into ﬂame as they came toppling down.
Soon there was great peril of ﬁre behind the wall, and all who
could be spared were busy quelling the ﬂames that sprang up in many
places. Then among the greater casts there fell another hail, less
ruinous but more horrible. All about the streets and lanes behind the
Gate it tumbled down, small round shot that did not burn. But when
men ran to learn what it might be, they cried aloud or wept. For the
enemy was ﬂinging into the City all the heads of those who had fallen

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

823

ﬁghting at Osgiliath, or on the Rammas, or in the ﬁelds. They were
grim to look on; for though some were crushed and shapeless, and
some had been cruelly hewn, yet many had features that could be
told, and it seemed that they had died in pain; and all were branded
with the foul token of the Lidless Eye. But marred and dishonoured
as they were, it often chanced that thus a man would see again the
face of someone that he had known, who had walked proudly once
in arms, or tilled the ﬁelds, or ridden in upon a holiday from the
green vales in the hills.
In vain men shook their ﬁsts at the pitiless foes that swarmed
before the Gate. Curses they heeded not, nor understood the tongues
of western men, crying with harsh voices like beasts and carrion-birds.
But soon there were few left in Minas Tirith who had the heart to
stand up and defy the hosts of Mordor. For yet another weapon,
swifter than hunger, the Lord of the Dark Tower had: dread and
despair.
The Nazgûl came again, and as their Dark Lord now grew and
put forth his strength, so their voices, which uttered only his will and
his malice, were ﬁlled with evil and horror. Ever they circled above
the City, like vultures that expect their ﬁll of doomed men’s ﬂesh.
Out of sight and shot they ﬂew, and yet were ever present, and their
deadly voices rent the air. More unbearable they became, not less,
at each new cry. At length even the stout-hearted would ﬂing themselves to the ground as the hidden menace passed over them, or they
would stand, letting their weapons fall from nerveless hands while
into their minds a blackness came, and they thought no more of war;
but only of hiding and of crawling, and of death.
During all this black day Faramir lay upon his bed in the chamber
of the White Tower, wandering in a desperate fever; dying someone
said, and soon ‘dying’ all men were saying upon the walls and in the
streets. And by him his father sat, and said nothing, but watched,
and gave no longer any heed to the defence.
No hours so dark had Pippin known, not even in the clutches of
the Uruk-hai. It was his duty to wait upon the Lord, and wait he
did, forgotten it seemed, standing by the door of the unlit chamber,
mastering his own fears as best he could. And as he watched, it
seemed to him that Denethor grew old before his eyes, as if something
had snapped in his proud will, and his stern mind was overthrown.
Grief maybe had wrought it, and remorse. He saw tears on that once
tearless face, more unbearable than wrath.
‘Do not weep, lord,’ he stammered. ‘Perhaps he will get well. Have
you asked Gandalf ?’
‘Comfort me not with wizards!’ said Denethor. ‘The fool’s hope

824

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

has failed. The Enemy has found it, and now his power waxes; he
sees our very thoughts, and all we do is ruinous.
‘I sent my son forth, unthanked, unblessed, out into needless peril,
and here he lies with poison in his veins. Nay, nay, whatever may
now betide in war, my line too is ending, even the House of the
Stewards has failed. Mean folk shall rule the last remnant of the
Kings of Men, lurking in the hills until all are hounded out.’
Men came to the door crying for the Lord of the City. ‘Nay, I will
not come down,’ he said. ‘I must stay beside my son. He might still
speak before the end. But that is near. Follow whom you will, even
the Grey Fool, though his hope has failed. Here I stay.’
So it was that Gandalf took command of the last defence of the
City of Gondor. Wherever he came men’s hearts would lift again,
and the winged shadows pass from memory. Tirelessly he strode from
Citadel to Gate, from north to south about the wall; and with him
went the Prince of Dol Amroth in his shining mail. For he and his
knights still held themselves like lords in whom the race of Númenor
ran true. Men that saw them whispered saying: ‘Belike the old tales
speak well; there is Elvish blood in the veins of that folk, for the
people of Nimrodel dwelt in that land once long ago.’ And then one
would sing amid the gloom some staves of the Lay of Nimrodel, or
other songs of the Vale of Anduin out of vanished years.
And yet – when they had gone, the shadows closed on men again,
and their hearts went cold, and the valour of Gondor withered into
ash. And so slowly they passed out of a dim day of fears into the
darkness of a desperate night. Fires now raged unchecked in the ﬁrst
circle of the City, and the garrison upon the outer wall was already
in many places cut off from retreat. But the faithful who remained
there at their posts were few; most had ﬂed beyond the second gate.
Far behind the battle the River had been swiftly bridged, and all
day more force and gear of war had poured across. Now at last in
the middle night the assault was loosed. The vanguard passed through
the trenches of ﬁre by many devious paths that had been left between
them. On they came, reckless of their loss as they approached, still
bunched and herded, within the range of bowmen on the wall. But
indeed there were too few now left there to do them great damage,
though the light of the ﬁres showed up many a mark for archers of
such skill as Gondor once had boasted. Then perceiving that the
valour of the City was already beaten down, the hidden Captain put
forth his strength. Slowly the great siege-towers built in Osgiliath
rolled forward through the dark.
*
*
*

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

825

Messengers came again to the chamber in the White Tower, and
Pippin let them enter, for they were urgent. Denethor turned his
head slowly from Faramir’s face, and looked at them silently.
‘The ﬁrst circle of the City is burning, lord,’ they said. ‘What are
your commands? You are still the Lord and Steward. Not all will
follow Mithrandir. Men are ﬂying from the walls and leaving them
unmanned.’
‘Why? Why do the fools ﬂy?’ said Denethor. ‘Better to burn sooner
than late, for burn we must. Go back to your bonﬁre! And I? I will
go now to my pyre. To my pyre! No tomb for Denethor and Faramir.
No tomb! No long slow sleep of death embalmed. We will burn like
heathen kings before ever a ship sailed hither from the West. The
West has failed. Go back and burn!’
The messengers without bow or answer turned and ﬂed.
Now Denethor stood up and released the fevered hand of Faramir
that he had held. ‘He is burning, already burning,’ he said sadly.
‘The house of his spirit crumbles.’ Then stepping softly towards
Pippin he looked down at him.
‘Farewell!’ he said. ‘Farewell, Peregrin son of Paladin! Your service
has been short, and now it is drawing to an end. I release you
from the little that remains. Go now, and die in what way seems
best to you. And with whom you will, even that friend whose folly
brought you to this death. Send for my servants and then go. Farewell!’
‘I will not say farewell, my lord,’ said Pippin kneeling. And then
suddenly hobbit-like once more, he stood up and looked the old man
in the eyes. ‘I will take your leave, sir,’ he said; ‘for I want to see
Gandalf very much indeed. But he is no fool; and I will not think of
dying until he despairs of life. But from my word and your service I
do not wish to be released while you live. And if they come at last
to the Citadel, I hope to be here and stand beside you and earn
perhaps the arms that you have given me.’
‘Do as you will, Master Halﬂing,’ said Denethor. ‘But my life is
broken. Send for my servants!’ He turned back to Faramir.
Pippin left him and called for the servants, and they came: six
men of the household, strong and fair; yet they trembled at the
summons. But in a quiet voice Denethor bade them lay warm coverlets on Faramir’s bed and take it up. And they did so, and lifting up
the bed they bore it from the chamber. Slowly they paced to trouble
the fevered man as little as might be, and Denethor, now bending
on a staff, followed them; and last came Pippin.
Out from the White Tower they walked, as if to a funeral, out
into the darkness, where the overhanging cloud was lit beneath with

826

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

ﬂickers of dull red. Softly they paced the great courtyard, and at a
word from Denethor halted beside the Withered Tree.
All was silent, save for the rumour of war in the City down below,
and they heard the water dripping sadly from the dead branches into
the dark pool. Then they went on through the Citadel gate, where
the sentinel stared at them in wonder and dismay as they passed by.
Turning westward they came at length to a door in the rearward wall
of the sixth circle. Fen Hollen it was called, for it was kept ever shut
save at times of funeral, and only the Lord of the City might use that
way, or those who bore the token of the tombs and tended the houses
of the dead. Beyond it went a winding road that descended in many
curves down to the narrow land under the shadow of Mindolluin’s
precipice where stood the mansions of the dead Kings and of their
Stewards.
A porter sat in a little house beside the way, and with fear in his
eyes he came forth bearing a lantern in his hand. At the Lord’s
command he unlocked the door, and silently it swung back; and they
passed through, taking the lantern from his hand. It was dark on
the climbing road between ancient walls and many-pillared balusters
looming in the swaying lantern-beam. Their slow feet echoed as they
walked down, down, until at last they came to the Silent Street, Rath
Dı́nen, between pale domes and empty halls and images of men long
dead; and they entered into the House of the Stewards and set down
their burden.
There Pippin, staring uneasily about him, saw that he was in a
wide vaulted chamber, draped as it were with the great shadows that
the little lantern threw upon its shrouded walls. And dimly to be seen
were many rows of tables, carved of marble; and upon each table lay
a sleeping form, hands folded, head pillowed upon stone. But one
table near at hand stood broad and bare. Upon it at a sign from
Denethor they laid Faramir and his father side by side, and covered
them with one covering, and stood then with bowed heads as
mourners beside a bed of death. Then Denethor spoke in a low voice.
‘Here we will wait,’ he said. ‘But send not for the embalmers.
Bring us wood quick to burn, and lay it all about us, and beneath;
and pour oil upon it. And when I bid you thrust in a torch. Do this
and speak no more to me. Farewell!’
‘By your leave, lord!’ said Pippin and turned and ﬂed in terror
from the deathly house. ‘Poor Faramir!’ he thought. ‘I must ﬁnd
Gandalf. Poor Faramir! Quite likely he needs medicine more than
tears. Oh, where can I ﬁnd Gandalf ? In the thick of things, I suppose;
and he will have no time to spare for dying men or madmen.’
At the door he turned to one of the servants who had remained
on guard there. ‘Your master is not himself,’ he said. ‘Go slow! Bring

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

827

no ﬁre to this place while Faramir lives! Do nothing until Gandalf
comes!’
‘Who is the master of Minas Tirith?’ the man answered. ‘The
Lord Denethor or the Grey Wanderer?’
‘The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem,’ said Pippin, and
he sped back and up the winding way as swiftly as his feet would
carry him, past the astonished porter, out through the door, and on,
till he came near the gate of the Citadel. The sentinel hailed him as
he went by, and he recognized the voice of Beregond.
‘Whither do you run, Master Peregrin?’ he cried.
‘To ﬁnd Mithrandir,’ Pippin answered.
‘The Lord’s errands are urgent and should not be hindered by
me,’ said Beregond; ‘but tell me quickly, if you may: what goes
forward? Whither has my Lord gone? I have just come on duty, but
I heard that he passed towards the Closed Door, and men were
bearing Faramir before him.’
‘Yes,’ said Pippin, ‘to the Silent Street.’
Beregond bowed his head to hide his tears. ‘They said that he was
dying,’ he sighed, ‘and now he is dead.’
‘No,’ said Pippin, ‘not yet. And even now his death might be
prevented, I think. But the Lord of the City, Beregond, has fallen
before his city is taken. He is fey and dangerous.’ Quickly he told
of Denethor’s strange words and deeds. ‘I must ﬁnd Gandalf at
once.’
‘Then you must go down to the battle.’
‘I know. The Lord has given me leave. But, Beregond, if you can,
do something to stop any dreadful thing happening.’
‘The Lord does not permit those who wear the black and silver
to leave their post for any cause, save at his own command.’
‘Well, you must choose between orders and the life of Faramir,’
said Pippin. ‘And as for orders, I think you have a madman to deal
with, not a lord. I must run. I will return if I can.’
He ran on, down, down towards the outer city. Men ﬂying back
from the burning passed him, and some seeing his livery turned and
shouted, but he paid no heed. At last he was through the Second
Gate, beyond which great ﬁres leaped up between the walls. Yet it
seemed strangely silent. No noise or shouts of battle or din of arms
could be heard. Then suddenly there was a dreadful cry and a great
shock, and a deep echoing boom. Forcing himself on against a gust
of fear and horror that shook him almost to his knees, Pippin turned
a corner opening on the wide place behind the City Gate. He stopped
dead. He had found Gandalf; but he shrank back, cowering into a
shadow.
*
*
*

828

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Ever since the middle night the great assault had gone on. The
drums rolled. To the north and to the south company upon company
of the enemy pressed to the walls. There came great beasts, like
moving houses in the red and ﬁtful light, the mûmakil of the Harad
dragging through the lanes amid the ﬁres huge towers and engines.
Yet their Captain cared not greatly what they did or how many might
be slain: their purpose was only to test the strength of the defence
and to keep the men of Gondor busy in many places. It was against
the Gate that he would throw his heaviest weight. Very strong it
might be, wrought of steel and iron, and guarded with towers and
bastions of indomitable stone, yet it was the key, the weakest point
in all that high and impenetrable wall.
The drums rolled louder. Fires leaped up. Great engines crawled
across the ﬁeld; and in the midst was a huge ram, great as a forest-tree
a hundred feet in length, swinging on mighty chains. Long had it
been forging in the dark smithies of Mordor, and its hideous head,
founded of black steel, was shaped in the likeness of a ravening wolf;
on it spells of ruin lay. Grond they named it, in memory of the
Hammer of the Underworld of old. Great beasts drew it, orcs surrounded it, and behind walked mountain-trolls to wield it.
But about the Gate resistance still was stout, and there the knights
of Dol Amroth and the hardiest of the garrison stood at bay. Shot
and dart fell thick; siege-towers crashed or blazed suddenly like
torches. All before the walls on either side of the Gate the ground
was choked with wreck and with bodies of the slain; yet still driven
as by a madness more and more came up.
Grond crawled on. Upon its housing no ﬁre would catch; and
though now and again some great beast that hauled it would go mad
and spread stamping ruin among the orcs innumerable that guarded
it, their bodies were cast aside from its path and others took their
place.
Grond crawled on. The drums rolled wildly. Over the hills of slain
a hideous shape appeared: a horseman, tall, hooded, cloaked in black.
Slowly, trampling the fallen, he rode forth, heeding no longer any
dart. He halted and held up a long pale sword. And as he did so a
great fear fell on all, defender and foe alike; and the hands of men
drooped to their sides, and no bow sang. For a moment all was still.
The drums rolled and rattled. With a vast rush Grond was hurled
forward by huge hands. It reached the Gate. It swung. A deep boom
rumbled through the City like thunder running in the clouds. But
the doors of iron and posts of steel withstood the stroke.
Then the Black Captain rose in his stirrups and cried aloud in a
dreadful voice, speaking in some forgotten tongue words of power
and terror to rend both heart and stone.

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

829

Thrice he cried. Thrice the great ram boomed. And suddenly upon
the last stroke the Gate of Gondor broke. As if stricken by some
blasting spell it burst asunder: there was a ﬂash of searing lightning,
and the doors tumbled in riven fragments to the ground.
In rode the Lord of the Nazgûl. A great black shape against the
ﬁres beyond he loomed up, grown to a vast menace of despair. In
rode the Lord of the Nazgûl, under the archway that no enemy ever
yet had passed, and all ﬂed before his face.
All save one. There waiting, silent and still in the space before the
Gate, sat Gandalf upon Shadowfax: Shadowfax who alone among
the free horses of the earth endured the terror, unmoving, steadfast
as a graven image in Rath Dı́nen.
‘You cannot enter here,’ said Gandalf, and the huge shadow
halted. ‘Go back to the abyss prepared for you! Go back! Fall into
the nothingness that awaits you and your Master. Go!’
The Black Rider ﬂung back his hood, and behold! he had a kingly
crown; and yet upon no head visible was it set. The red ﬁres shone
between it and the mantled shoulders vast and dark. From a mouth
unseen there came a deadly laughter.
‘Old fool!’ he said. ‘Old fool! This is my hour. Do you not know
Death when you see it? Die now and curse in vain!’ And with that
he lifted high his sword and ﬂames ran down the blade.
Gandalf did not move. And in that very moment, away behind in
some courtyard of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear he crowed,
recking nothing of wizardry or war, welcoming only the morning that
in the sky far above the shadows of death was coming with the dawn.
And as if in answer there came from far away another note. Horns,
horns, horns. In dark Mindolluin’s sides they dimly echoed. Great
horns of the North wildly blowing. Rohan had come at last.

THE BATTLE OF THE PELENNOR FIELDS

843

not be denied. Live now in blessedness; and when you sit in peace
with your pipe, think of me! For never now shall I sit with you in
Meduseld, as I promised, or listen to your herb-lore.’ He closed his
eyes, and Merry bowed beside him. Presently he spoke again. ‘Where
´
is Eomer?
For my eyes darken, and I would see him ere I go. He
´
must be king after me. And I would send word to Eowyn.
She, she
would not have me leave her, and now I shall not see her again,
dearer than daughter.’
‘Lord, lord,’ began Merry brokenly, ‘she is——’; but at that
moment there was a great clamour, and all about them horns and
trumpets were blowing. Merry looked round: he had forgotten the
war, and all the world beside, and many hours it seemed since the
king rode to his fall, though in truth it was only a little while. But
now he saw that they were in danger of being caught in the very
midst of the great battle that would soon be joined.
New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the
River; and from under the walls came the legions of Morgul; and
from the southward ﬁelds came footmen of Harad with horsemen
before them, and behind them rose the huge backs of the mûmakil
´
with war-towers upon them. But northward the white crest of Eomer
led the great front of the Rohirrim which he had again gathered and
marshalled; and out of the City came all the strength of men that
was in it, and the silver swan of Dol Amroth was borne in the van,
driving the enemy from the Gate.
For a moment the thought ﬂitted through Merry’s mind: ‘Where
is Gandalf ? Is he not here? Could he not have saved the king and
´
´
Eowyn?’
But thereupon Eomer
rode up in haste, and with him came
the knights of the household that still lived and had now mastered
their horses. They looked in wonder at the carcase of the fell beast
´
that lay there; and their steeds would not go near. But Eomer
leaped
from the saddle, and grief and dismay fell upon him as he came to
the king’s side and stood there in silence.
Then one of the knights took the king’s banner from the hand of
Guthláf the banner-bearer who lay dead, and he lifted it up. Slowly
Théoden opened his eyes. Seeing the banner he made a sign that it
´
should be given to Eomer.
´
‘Hail, King of the Mark!’ he said. ‘Ride now to victory! Bid Eowyn
´
farewell!’ And so he died, and knew not that Eowyn lay near him. And
those who stood by wept, crying: ‘Théoden King! Théoden King!’
´
But Eomer
said to them:
Mourn not overmuch! Mighty was the fallen,
meet was his ending. When his mound is raised,
women then shall weep. War now calls us!

Chapter 7
THE PYRE OF DENETHOR
When the dark shadow at the Gate withdrew Gandalf still sat motionless. But Pippin rose to his feet, as if a great weight had been lifted
from him; and he stood listening to the horns, and it seemed to him
that they would break his heart with joy. And never in after years
could he hear a horn blown in the distance without tears starting in
his eyes. But now suddenly his errand returned to his memory, and
he ran forward. At that moment Gandalf stirred and spoke to
Shadowfax, and was about to ride through the Gate.
‘Gandalf, Gandalf !’ cried Pippin, and Shadowfax halted.
‘What are you doing here?’ said Gandalf. ‘Is it not a law in the
City that those who wear the black and silver must stay in the Citadel,
unless their lord gives them leave?’
‘He has,’ said Pippin. ‘He sent me away. But I am frightened.
Something terrible may happen up there. The Lord is out of his
mind, I think. I am afraid he will kill himself, and kill Faramir too.
Can’t you do something?’
Gandalf looked through the gaping Gate, and already on the ﬁelds
he heard the gathering sound of battle. He clenched his hand. ‘I must
go,’ he said. ‘The Black Rider is abroad, and he will yet bring ruin
on us. I have no time.’
‘But Faramir!’ cried Pippin. ‘He is not dead, and they will burn
him alive, if someone does not stop them.’
‘Burn him alive?’ said Gandalf. ‘What is this tale? Be quick!’
‘Denethor has gone to the Tombs,’ said Pippin, ‘and he has taken
Faramir, and he says we are all to burn, and he will not wait, and
they are to make a pyre and burn him on it, and Faramir as well.
And he has sent men to fetch wood and oil. And I have told Beregond,
but I’m afraid he won’t dare to leave his post: he is on guard. And
what can he do anyway?’ So Pippin poured out his tale, reaching up
and touching Gandalf ’s knee with trembling hands. ‘Can’t you save
Faramir?’
‘Maybe I can,’ said Gandalf; ‘but if I do, then others will die, I
fear. Well, I must come, since no other help can reach him. But evil
and sorrow will come of this. Even in the heart of our stronghold the
Enemy has power to strike us: for his will it is that is at work.’
Then having made up his mind he acted swiftly; and catching
up Pippin and setting him before him, he turned Shadowfax with a
word. Up the climbing streets of Minas Tirith they clattered, while

THE PYRE OF DENETHOR

851

the noise of war rose behind them. Everywhere men were rising from
their despair and dread, seizing their weapons, crying one to another:
‘Rohan has come!’ Captains were shouting, companies were mustering; many already were marching down to the Gate.
They met the Prince Imrahil, and he called to them: ‘Whither
now, Mithrandir? The Rohirrim are ﬁghting on the ﬁelds of Gondor!
We must gather all the strength that we can ﬁnd.’
‘You will need every man and more,’ said Gandalf. ‘Make all
haste. I will come when I can. But I have an errand to the Lord
Denethor that will not wait. Take command in the Lord’s absence!’
They passed on; and as they climbed and drew near to the Citadel
they felt the wind blowing in their faces, and they caught the glimmer
of morning far away, a light growing in the southern sky. But it
brought little hope to them, not knowing what evil lay before them,
fearing to come too late.
‘Darkness is passing,’ said Gandalf, ‘but it still lies heavy on this
City.’
At the gate of the Citadel they found no guard. ‘Then Beregond
has gone,’ said Pippin more hopefully. They turned away and
hastened along the road to the Closed Door. It stood wide open, and
the porter lay before it. He was slain and his key had been taken.
‘Work of the Enemy!’ said Gandalf. ‘Such deeds he loves: friend
at war with friend; loyalty divided in confusion of hearts.’ Now he
dismounted and bade Shadowfax return to his stable. ‘For, my
friend,’ he said, ‘you and I should have ridden to the ﬁelds long ago,
but other matters delay me. Yet come swiftly if I call!’
They passed the Door and walked on down the steep winding
road. Light was growing, and the tall columns and carven ﬁgures
beside the way went slowly by like grey ghosts.
Suddenly the silence was broken, and they heard below them cries
and the ringing of swords: such sounds as had not been heard in the
hallowed places since the building of the City. At last they came to
Rath Dı́nen and hastened towards the House of the Stewards, looming in the twilight under its great dome.
‘Stay! Stay!’ cried Gandalf, springing forward to the stone stair
before the door. ‘Stay this madness!’
For there were the servants of Denethor with swords and torches
in their hands; but alone in the porch upon the topmost step stood
Beregond, clad in the black and silver of the Guard; and he held the
door against them. Two of them had already fallen to his sword,
staining the hallows with their blood; and the others cursed him,
calling him outlaw and traitor to his master.
Even as Gandalf and Pippin ran forward, they heard from within

852

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the house of the dead the voice of Denethor crying: ‘Haste, haste!
Do as I have bidden! Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself ?’
Thereupon the door which Beregond held shut with his left hand
was wrenched open, and there behind him stood the Lord of the
City, tall and fell; a light like ﬂame was in his eyes, and he held a
drawn sword.
But Gandalf sprang up the steps, and the men fell back from him
and covered their eyes; for his coming was like the incoming of a
white light into a dark place, and he came with great anger. He lifted
up his hand, and in the very stroke, the sword of Denethor ﬂew up
and left his grasp and fell behind him in the shadows of the house;
and Denethor stepped backward before Gandalf as one amazed.
‘What is this, my lord?’ said the wizard. ‘The houses of the dead
are no places for the living. And why do men ﬁght here in the Hallows
when there is war enough before the Gate? Or has our Enemy come
even to Rath Dı́nen?’
‘Since when has the Lord of Gondor been answerable to thee?’
said Denethor. ‘Or may I not command my own servants?’
‘You may,’ said Gandalf. ‘But others may contest your will, when
it is turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?’
‘He lies within,’ said Denethor, ‘burning, already burning. They
have set a ﬁre in his ﬂesh. But soon all shall be burned. The West
has failed. It shall all go up in a great ﬁre, and all shall be ended.
Ash! Ash and smoke blown away on the wind!’
Then Gandalf seeing the madness that was on him feared that he
had already done some evil deed, and he thrust forward, with Beregond and Pippin behind him, while Denethor gave back until he
stood beside the table within. But there they found Faramir, still
dreaming in his fever, lying upon the table. Wood was piled under
it, and high all about it, and all was drenched with oil, even the
garments of Faramir and the coverlets; but as yet no ﬁre had been
set to the fuel. Then Gandalf revealed the strength that lay hid in
him, even as the light of his power was hidden under his grey mantle.
He leaped up on to the faggots, and raising the sick man lightly he
sprang down again, and bore him towards the door. But as he did
so Faramir moaned and called on his father in his dream.
Denethor started as one waking from a trance, and the ﬂame died
in his eyes, and he wept; and he said: ‘Do not take my son from me!
He calls for me.’
‘He calls,’ said Gandalf, ‘but you cannot come to him yet. For he
must seek healing on the threshold of death, and maybe ﬁnd it not.
Whereas your part is to go out to the battle of your City, where
maybe death awaits you. This you know in your heart.’
‘He will not wake again,’ said Denethor. ‘Battle is vain. Why

THE PYRE OF DENETHOR

853

should we wish to live longer? Why should we not go to death side
by side?’
‘Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the
hour of your death,’ answered Gandalf. ‘And only the heathen kings,
under the domination of the Dark Power, did thus, slaying themselves
in pride and despair, murdering their kin to ease their own death.’
Then passing through the door he took Faramir from the deadly
house and laid him on the bier on which he had been brought, and
which had now been set in the porch. Denethor followed him, and
stood trembling, looking with longing on the face of his son. And for
a moment, while all were silent and still, watching the Lord in his
throes, he wavered.
‘Come!’ said Gandalf. ‘We are needed. There is much that you
can yet do.’
Then suddenly Denethor laughed. He stood up tall and proud
again, and stepping swiftly back to the table he lifted from it the
pillow on which his head had lain. Then coming to the doorway he
drew aside the covering, and lo! he had between his hands a palantı́r.
And as he held it up, it seemed to those that looked on that the globe
began to glow with an inner ﬂame, so that the lean face of the Lord
was lit as with a red ﬁre, and it seemed cut out of hard stone, sharp
with black shadows, noble, proud, and terrible. His eyes glittered.
‘Pride and despair!’ he cried. ‘Didst thou think that the eyes of
the White Tower were blind? Nay, I have seen more than thou knowest, Grey Fool. For thy hope is but ignorance. Go then and labour
in healing! Go forth and ﬁght! Vanity. For a little space you may
triumph on the ﬁeld, for a day. But against the Power that now arises
there is no victory. To this City only the ﬁrst ﬁnger of its hand has
yet been stretched. All the East is moving. And even now the wind
of thy hope cheats thee and wafts up Anduin a ﬂeet with black sails.
The West has failed. It is time for all to depart who would not be
slaves.’
‘Such counsels will make the Enemy’s victory certain indeed,’ said
Gandalf.
‘Hope on then!’ laughed Denethor. ‘Do I not know thee, Mithrandir? Thy hope is to rule in my stead, to stand behind every throne,
north, south, or west. I have read thy mind and its policies. Do I not
know that this halﬂing was commanded by thee to keep silence? That
he was brought hither to be a spy within my very chamber? And yet
in our speech together I have learned the names and purpose of all
thy companions. So! With the left hand thou wouldst use me for a
little while as a shield against Mordor, and with the right bring up
this Ranger of the North to supplant me.
‘But I say to thee, Gandalf Mithrandir, I will not be thy tool! I

854

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

am Steward of the House of Anárion. I will not step down to be the
dotard chamberlain of an upstart. Even were his claim proved to me,
still he comes but of the line of Isildur. I will not bow to such a one,
last of a ragged house long bereft of lordship and dignity.’
‘What then would you have,’ said Gandalf, ‘if your will could have
its way?’
‘I would have things as they were in all the days of my life,’
answered Denethor, ‘and in the days of my longfathers before me:
to be the Lord of this City in peace, and leave my chair to a son after
me, who would be his own master and no wizard’s pupil. But if doom
denies this to me, then I will have naught: neither life diminished,
nor love halved, nor honour abated.’
‘To me it would not seem that a Steward who faithfully surrenders
his charge is diminished in love or in honour,’ said Gandalf. ‘And at
the least you shall not rob your son of his choice while his death is
still in doubt.’
At those words Denethor’s eyes ﬂamed again, and taking the Stone
under his arm he drew a knife and strode towards the bier. But
Beregond sprang forward and set himself before Faramir.
‘So!’ cried Denethor. ‘Thou hadst already stolen half my son’s
love. Now thou stealest the hearts of my knights also, so that they
rob me wholly of my son at the last. But in this at least thou shalt
not defy my will: to rule my own end.’
‘Come hither!’ he cried to his servants. ‘Come, if you are not all
recreant!’ Then two of them ran up the steps to him. Swiftly he
snatched a torch from the hand of one and sprang back into the
house. Before Gandalf could hinder him he thrust the brand amid
the fuel, and at once it crackled and roared into ﬂame.
Then Denethor leaped upon the table, and standing there
wreathed in ﬁre and smoke he took up the staff of his stewardship
that lay at his feet and broke it on his knee. Casting the pieces into
the blaze he bowed and laid himself on the table, clasping the palantı́r
with both hands upon his breast. And it was said that ever after, if
any man looked in that Stone, unless he had a great strength of will
to turn it to other purpose, he saw only two aged hands withering in
ﬂame.
Gandalf in grief and horror turned his face away and closed the
door. For a while he stood in thought, silent upon the threshold,
while those outside heard the greedy roaring of the ﬁre within. And
then Denethor gave a great cry, and afterwards spoke no more, nor
was ever again seen by mortal men.
‘So passes Denethor, son of Ecthelion,’ said Gandalf. Then he
turned to Beregond and the Lord’s servants that stood there aghast.

THE PYRE OF DENETHOR

855

‘And so pass also the days of Gondor that you have known; for good
or evil they are ended. Ill deeds have been done here; but let now
all enmity that lies between you be put away, for it was contrived by
the Enemy and works his will. You have been caught in a net of
warring duties that you did not weave. But think, you servants of the
Lord, blind in your obedience, that but for the treason of Beregond
Faramir, Captain of the White Tower, would now also be burned.
‘Bear away from this unhappy place your comrades who have
fallen. And we will bear Faramir, Steward of Gondor, to a place
where he can sleep in peace, or die if that be his doom.’
Then Gandalf and Beregond taking up the bier bore it away
towards the Houses of Healing, while behind them walked Pippin
with downcast head. But the servants of the Lord stood gazing as
stricken men at the house of the dead; and even as Gandalf came to
the end of Rath Dı́nen there was a great noise. Looking back they
saw the dome of the house crack and smokes issue forth; and then
with a rush and rumble of stone it fell in a ﬂurry of ﬁre; but still
unabated the ﬂames danced and ﬂickered among the ruins. Then in
terror the servants ﬂed and followed Gandalf.
At length they came back to the Steward’s Door, and Beregond
looked with grief at the porter. ‘This deed I shall ever rue,’ he said;
‘but a madness of haste was on me, and he would not listen, but
drew sword against me.’ Then taking the key that he had wrested
from the slain man he closed the door and locked it. ‘This should
now be given to the Lord Faramir,’ he said.
‘The Prince of Dol Amroth is in command in the absence of the
Lord,’ said Gandalf; ‘but since he is not here, I must take this on
myself. I bid you keep the key and guard it, until the City is set in
order again.’
Now at last they passed into the high circles of the City, and in
the light of morning they went their way towards the Houses of
Healing; and these were fair houses set apart for the care of those
who were grievously sick, but now they were prepared for the tending
of men hurt in battle or dying. They stood not far from the Citadelgate, in the sixth circle, nigh to its southward wall, and about them
was a garden and a greensward with trees, the only such place in the
City. There dwelt the few women that had been permitted to remain
in Minas Tirith, since they were skilled in healing or in the service
of the healers.
But even as Gandalf and his companions came carrying the bier
to the main door of the Houses, they heard a great cry that went up
from the ﬁeld before the Gate and rising shrill and piercing into the
sky passed, and died away on the wind. So terrible was the cry that

856

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

for a moment all stood still, and yet when it had passed, suddenly
their hearts were lifted up in such a hope as they had not known
since the darkness came out of the East; and it seemed to them that
the light grew clear and the sun broke through the clouds.
But Gandalf ’s face was grave and sad, and bidding Beregond and
Pippin to take Faramir into the Houses of Healing, he went up on
to the walls nearby; and there like a ﬁgure carven in white he stood
in the new sun and looked out. And he beheld with the sight that
´
was given to him all that had befallen; and when Eomer
rode out
from the forefront of his battle and stood beside those who lay upon
the ﬁeld, he sighed, and he cast his cloak about him again, and went
from the walls. And Beregond and Pippin found him standing in
thought before the door of the Houses when they came out.
They looked at him, and for a while he was silent. At last he spoke.
‘My friends,’ he said, ‘and all you people of this city and of the
Western lands! Things of great sorrow and renown have come to
pass. Shall we weep or be glad? Beyond hope the Captain of our foes
has been destroyed, and you have heard the echo of his last despair.
But he has not gone without woe and bitter loss. And that I might
have averted but for the madness of Denethor. So long has the reach
of our Enemy become! Alas! but now I perceive how his will was
able to enter into the very heart of the City.
‘Though the Stewards deemed that it was a secret kept only by
themselves, long ago I guessed that here in the White Tower, one at
least of the Seven Seeing Stones was preserved. In the days of his
wisdom Denethor would not presume to use it to challenge Sauron,
knowing the limits of his own strength. But his wisdom failed; and
I fear that as the peril of his realm grew he looked in the Stone and
was deceived: far too often, I guess, since Boromir departed. He was
too great to be subdued to the will of the Dark Power, he saw nonetheless only those things which that Power permitted him to see. The
knowledge which he obtained was, doubtless, often of service to him;
yet the vision of the great might of Mordor that was shown to him
fed the despair of his heart until it overthrew his mind.’
‘Now I understand what seemed so strange to me!’ said Pippin,
shuddering at his memories as he spoke. ‘The Lord went away from
the room where Faramir lay; and it was only when he returned that
I ﬁrst thought he was changed, old and broken.’
‘It was in the very hour that Faramir was brought to the Tower
that many of us saw a strange light in the topmost chamber,’ said
Beregond. ‘But we have seen that light before, and it has long been
rumoured in the City that the Lord would at times wrestle in thought
with his Enemy.’

THE PYRE OF DENETHOR

857

‘Alas! then I have guessed rightly,’ said Gandalf. ‘Thus the will of
Sauron entered into Minas Tirith; and thus I have been delayed here.
And here I shall still be forced to remain, for I shall soon have other
charges, not Faramir only.
‘Now I must go down to meet those who come. I have seen a
sight upon the ﬁeld that is very grievous to my heart, and greater
sorrow may yet come to pass. Come with me, Pippin! But you,
Beregond, should return to the Citadel and tell the chief of the Guard
there what has befallen. It will be his duty, I fear, to withdraw you
from the Guard; but say to him that, if I may give him counsel, you
should be sent to the Houses of Healing, to be the guard and servant
of your captain, and to be at his side when he awakes – if that shall
ever be again. For by you he was saved from the ﬁre. Go now! I shall
return soon.’
With that he turned away and went with Pippin down towards the
lower city. And even as they hastened on their way the wind brought
a grey rain, and all the ﬁres sank, and there arose a great smoke
before them.

Chapter 8
THE HOUSES OF HEALING
A mist was in Merry’s eyes of tears and weariness when they drew
near the ruined Gate of Minas Tirith. He gave little heed to the
wreck and slaughter that lay about all. Fire and smoke and stench
was in the air; for many engines had been burned or cast into the
ﬁre-pits, and many of the slain also, while here and there lay many
carcases of the great Southron monsters, half-burned, or broken by
stone-cast, or shot through the eyes by the valiant archers of Morthond. The ﬂying rain had ceased for a time, and the sun gleamed
up above; but all the lower city was still wrapped in a smouldering
reek.
Already men were labouring to clear a way through the jetsam of
battle; and now out from the Gate came some bearing litters. Gently
´
they laid Eowyn
upon soft pillows; but the king’s body they covered
with a great cloth of gold, and they bore torches about him, and their
ﬂames, pale in the sunlight, were ﬂuttered by the wind.
´
So Théoden and Eowyn
came to the City of Gondor, and all who
saw them bared their heads and bowed; and they passed through the
ash and fume of the burned circle, and went on and up along the
streets of stone. To Merry the ascent seemed agelong, a meaningless
journey in a hateful dream, going on and on to some dim ending
that memory cannot seize.
Slowly the lights of the torches in front of him ﬂickered and went
out, and he was walking in a darkness; and he thought: ‘This is a
tunnel leading to a tomb; there we shall stay for ever.’ But suddenly
into his dream there fell a living voice.
‘Well, Merry! Thank goodness I have found you!’
He looked up and the mist before his eyes cleared a little. There
was Pippin! They were face to face in a narrow lane, and but for
themselves it was empty. He rubbed his eyes.
´
‘Where is the king?’ he said. ‘And Eowyn?’
Then he stumbled and
sat down on a doorstep and began to weep again.
‘They have gone up into the Citadel,’ said Pippin. ‘I think you
must have fallen asleep on your feet and taken the wrong turning.
When we found that you were not with them, Gandalf sent me to
look for you. Poor old Merry! How glad I am to see you again! But
you are worn out, and I won’t bother you with any talk. But tell me,
are you hurt, or wounded?’
‘No,’ said Merry. ‘Well, no, I don’t think so. But I can’t use my

THE HOUSES OF HEALING

859

right arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed him. And my sword burned
all away like a piece of wood.’
Pippin’s face was anxious. ‘Well, you had better come with me as
quick as you can,’ he said. ‘I wish I could carry you. You aren’t ﬁt
to walk any further. They shouldn’t have let you walk at all; but you
must forgive them. So many dreadful things have happened in the
City, Merry, that one poor hobbit coming in from the battle is easily
overlooked.’
‘It’s not always a misfortune being overlooked,’ said Merry. ‘I was
overlooked just now by – no, no, I can’t speak of it. Help me, Pippin!
It’s all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.’
‘Lean on me, Merry lad!’ said Pippin. ‘Come now! Foot by foot.
It’s not far.’
‘Are you going to bury me?’ said Merry.
‘No, indeed!’ said Pippin, trying to sound cheerful, though his
heart was wrung with fear and pity. ‘No, we are going to the Houses
of Healing.’
They turned out of the lane that ran between tall houses and the
outer wall of the fourth circle, and they regained the main street
climbing up to the Citadel. Step by step they went, while Merry
swayed and murmured as one in sleep.
‘I’ll never get him there,’ thought Pippin. ‘Is there no one to help
me? I can’t leave him here.’ Just then to his surprise a boy came
running up behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil Beregond’s
son.
‘Hullo, Bergil!’ he called. ‘Where are you going? Glad to see you
again, and still alive!’
‘I am running errands for the Healers,’ said Bergil. ‘I cannot stay.’
‘Don’t!’ said Pippin. ‘But tell them up there that I have a sick
hobbit, a perian mind you, come from the battle-ﬁeld. I don’t think
he can walk so far. If Mithrandir is there, he will be glad of the
message.’ Bergil ran on.
‘I’d better wait here,’ thought Pippin. So he let Merry sink gently
down on to the pavement in a patch of sunlight, and then he sat
down beside him, laying Merry’s head in his lap. He felt his body
and limbs gently, and took his friend’s hands in his own. The right
hand felt icy to the touch.
It was not long before Gandalf himself came in search of them.
He stooped over Merry and caressed his brow; then he lifted him
carefully. ‘He should have been borne in honour into this city,’ he
said. ‘He has well repaid my trust; for if Elrond had not yielded to
me, neither of you would have set out; and then far more grievous
would the evils of this day have been.’ He sighed. ‘And yet here is

862

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

When they had stood silent for a time beside the king, Imrahil
said: ‘Where is the Steward? And where also is Mithrandir?’
And one of the guards answered: ‘The Steward of Gondor is in
the Houses of Healing.’
´
´
But Eomer
said: ‘Where is the Lady Eowyn,
my sister; for surely
she should be lying beside the king, and in no less honour? Where
have they bestowed her?’
´
And Imrahil said: ‘But the Lady Eowyn
was yet living when they
bore her hither. Did you not know?’
´
Then hope unlooked-for came so suddenly to Eomer’s
heart, and
with it the bite of care and fear renewed, that he said no more, but
turned and went swiftly from the hall; and the Prince followed him.
And when they came forth evening had fallen and many stars were
in the sky. And there came Gandalf on foot and with him one cloaked
in grey; and they met before the doors of the Houses of Healing.
And they greeted Gandalf and said: ‘We seek the Steward, and men
say that he is in this House. Has any hurt befallen him? And the
´
Lady Eowyn,
where is she?’
And Gandalf answered: ‘She lies within and is not dead, but is
near death. But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart, as
you have heard, and he is now the Steward; for Denethor has
departed, and his house is in ashes.’ And they were ﬁlled with grief
and wonder at the tale that he told.
But Imrahil said: ‘So victory is shorn of gladness, and it is bitter
bought, if both Gondor and Rohan are in one day bereft of their
´
lords. Eomer
rules the Rohirrim. Who shall rule the City meanwhile?
Shall we not send now for the Lord Aragorn?’
And the cloaked man spoke and said: ‘He is come.’ And they saw
as he stepped into the light of the lantern by the door that it was
Aragorn, wrapped in the grey cloak of Lórien above his mail, and
bearing no other token than the green stone of Galadriel. ‘I have
come because Gandalf begs me to do so,’ he said. ‘But for the present
I am but the Captain of the Dúnedain of Arnor; and the Lord of
Dol Amroth shall rule the City until Faramir awakes. But it is my
counsel that Gandalf should rule us all in the days that follow and
in our dealings with the Enemy.’ And they agreed upon that.
Then Gandalf said: ‘Let us not stay at the door, for the time is
urgent. Let us enter! For it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any
hope remains for the sick that lie in the House. Thus spake Ioreth,
wise-woman of Gondor: The hands of the king are the hands of a healer,
and so shall the rightful king be known.’
Then Aragorn entered ﬁrst and the others followed. And there at
the door were two guards in the livery of the Citadel: one tall, but

THE HOUSES OF HEALING

863

the other scarce the height of a boy; and when he saw them he cried
aloud in surprise and joy.
‘Strider! How splendid! Do you know, I guessed it was you in the
black ships. But they were all shouting corsairs and wouldn’t listen
to me. How did you do it?’
Aragorn laughed, and took the hobbit by the hand. ‘Well met
indeed!’ he said. ‘But there is not time yet for travellers’ tales.’
´
But Imrahil said to Eomer:
‘Is it thus that we speak to our kings?
Yet maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!’
And Aragorn hearing him, turned and said: ‘Verily, for in the high
tongue of old I am Elessar, the Elfstone, and Envinyatar, the
Renewer’: and he lifted from his breast the green stone that lay there.
‘But Strider shall be the name of my house, if that be ever established.
In the high tongue it will not sound so ill, and Telcontar I will be and
all the heirs of my body.’
And with that they passed into the House; and as they went
towards the rooms where the sick were tended Gandalf told of the
´
deeds of Eowyn
and Meriadoc. ‘For,’ he said, ‘long have I stood by
them, and at ﬁrst they spoke much in their dreaming, before they
sank into the deadly darkness. Also it is given to me to see many
things far off.’
´
Aragorn went ﬁrst to Faramir, and then to the Lady Eowyn,
and
last to Merry. When he had looked on the faces of the sick and seen
their hurts he sighed. ‘Here I must put forth all such power and skill
as is given to me,’ he said. ‘Would that Elrond were here, for he is
the eldest of all our race, and has the greater power.’
´
And Eomer
seeing that he was both sorrowful and weary said:
‘First you must rest, surely, and at the least eat a little?’
But Aragorn answered: ‘Nay, for these three, and most soon for
Faramir, time is running out. All speed is needed.’
Then he called to Ioreth and he said: ‘You have store in this House
of the herbs of healing?’
‘Yes, lord,’ she answered; ‘but not enough, I reckon, for all that
will need them. But I am sure I do not know where we shall ﬁnd
more; for all things are amiss in these dreadful days, what with ﬁres
and burnings, and the lads that run errands so few, and all the roads
blocked. Why, it is days out of count since ever a carrier came in
from Lossarnach to the market! But we do our best in this House
with what we have, as I am sure your lordship will know.’
‘I will judge that when I see,’ said Aragorn. ‘One thing also is
short, time for speech. Have you athelas?’
‘I do not know, I am sure, lord,’ she answered, ‘at least not by
that name. I will go and ask of the herb-master; he knows all the old
names.’

864

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘It is also called kingsfoil,’ said Aragorn; ‘and maybe you know it
by that name, for so the country-folk call it in these latter days.’
‘Oh that!’ said Ioreth. ‘Well, if your lordship had named it at ﬁrst
I could have told you. No, we have none of it, I am sure. Why, I
have never heard that it had any great virtue; and indeed I have often
said to my sisters when we came upon it growing in the woods:
‘‘kingsfoil’’, I said, ‘‘’tis a strange name, and I wonder why ’tis called
so; for if I were a king, I would have plants more bright in my garden’’.
Still it smells sweet when bruised, does it not? If sweet is the right
word: wholesome, maybe, is nearer.’
‘Wholesome verily,’ said Aragorn. ‘And now, dame, if you love
the Lord Faramir, run as quick as your tongue and get me kingsfoil,
if there is a leaf in the City.’
‘And if not,’ said Gandalf, ‘I will ride to Lossarnach with Ioreth
behind me, and she shall take me to the woods, but not to her sisters.
And Shadowfax shall show her the meaning of haste.’
When Ioreth was gone, Aragorn bade the other women to make
water hot. Then he took Faramir’s hand in his, and laid the other hand
upon the sick man’s brow. It was drenched with sweat; but Faramir
did not move or make any sign, and seemed hardly to breathe.
‘He is nearly spent,’ said Aragorn turning to Gandalf. ‘But this
comes not from the wound. See! that is healing. Had he been smitten
by some dart of the Nazgûl, as you thought, he would have died that
night. This hurt was given by some Southron arrow, I would guess.
Who drew it forth? Was it kept?’
‘I drew it forth,’ said Imrahil, ‘and staunched the wound. But I
did not keep the arrow, for we had much to do. It was, as I remember,
just such a dart as the Southrons use. Yet I believed that it came
from the Shadows above, for else his fever and sickness were not to
be understood; since the wound was not deep or vital. How then do
you read the matter?’
‘Weariness, grief for his father’s mood, a wound, and over all the
Black Breath,’ said Aragorn. ‘He is a man of staunch will, for already
he had come close under the Shadow before ever he rode to battle
on the out-walls. Slowly the dark must have crept on him, even as
he fought and strove to hold his outpost. Would that I could have
been here sooner!’
Thereupon the herb-master entered. ‘Your lordship asked for
kingsfoil, as the rustics name it,’ he said; ‘or athelas in the noble
tongue, or to those who know somewhat of the Valinorean...’
‘I do so,’ said Aragorn, ‘and I care not whether you say now asëa
aranion or kingsfoil, so long as you have some.’

THE HOUSES OF HEALING

865

‘Your pardon lord!’ said the man. ‘I see you are a lore-master, not
merely a captain of war. But alas! sir, we do not keep this thing in
the Houses of Healing, where only the gravely hurt or sick are tended.
For it has no virtue that we know of, save perhaps to sweeten a fouled
air, or to drive away some passing heaviness. Unless, of course, you
give heed to rhymes of old days which women such as our good
Ioreth still repeat without understanding.
When the black breath blows
and death’s shadow grows
and all lights pass,
come athelas! come athelas!
Life to the dying
In the king’s hand lying!
It is but a doggrel, I fear, garbled in the memory of old wives. Its
meaning I leave to your judgement, if indeed it has any. But old folk
still use an infusion of the herb for headaches.’
‘Then in the name of the king, go and ﬁnd some old man of less
lore and more wisdom who keeps some in his house!’ cried Gandalf.
Now Aragorn knelt beside Faramir, and held a hand upon his
brow. And those that watched felt that some great struggle was going
on. For Aragorn’s face grew grey with weariness; and ever and anon
he called the name of Faramir, but each time more faintly to their
hearing, as if Aragorn himself was removed from them, and walked
afar in some dark vale, calling for one that was lost.
And at last Bergil came running in, and he bore six leaves in a
cloth. ‘It is kingsfoil, Sir,’ he said; ‘but not fresh, I fear. It must have
been culled two weeks ago at the least. I hope it will serve, Sir?’ Then
looking at Faramir he burst into tears.
But Aragorn smiled. ‘It will serve,’ he said. ‘The worst is now
over. Stay and be comforted!’ Then taking two leaves, he laid them
on his hands and breathed on them, and then he crushed them, and
straightway a living freshness ﬁlled the room, as if the air itself awoke
and tingled, sparkling with joy. And then he cast the leaves into the
bowls of steaming water that were brought to him, and at once all
hearts were lightened. For the fragrance that came to each was like
a memory of dewy mornings of unshadowed sun in some land of
which the fair world in spring is itself but a ﬂeeting memory. But
Aragorn stood up as one refreshed, and his eyes smiled as he held a
bowl before Faramir’s dreaming face.
‘Well now! Who would have believed it?’ said Ioreth to a woman
that stood beside her. ‘The weed is better than I thought. It reminds

866

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

me of the roses of Imloth Melui when I was a lass, and no king could
ask for better.’
Suddenly Faramir stirred, and he opened his eyes, and he looked
on Aragorn who bent over him; and a light of knowledge and love
was kindled in his eyes, and he spoke softly. ‘My lord, you called
me. I come. What does the king command?’
‘Walk no more in the shadows, but awake!’ said Aragorn. ‘You
are weary. Rest a while, and take food, and be ready when I return.’
‘I will, lord,’ said Faramir. ‘For who would lie idle when the king
has returned?’
‘Farewell then for a while!’ said Aragorn. ‘I must go to others who
need me.’ And he left the chamber with Gandalf and Imrahil; but
Beregond and his son remained behind, unable to contain their joy.
As he followed Gandalf and shut the door Pippin heard Ioreth
exclaim:
‘King! Did you hear that? What did I say? The hands of a healer,
I said.’ And soon the word had gone out from the House that the
king was indeed come among them, and after war he brought healing;
and the news ran through the City.
´
But Aragorn came to Eowyn,
and he said: ‘Here there is a grievous
hurt and a heavy blow. The arm that was broken has been tended
with due skill, and it will mend in time, if she has the strength to
live. It is the shield-arm that is maimed; but the chief evil comes
through the sword-arm. In that there now seems no life, although it
is unbroken.
‘Alas! For she was pitted against a foe beyond the strength of her
mind or body. And those who will take a weapon to such an enemy
must be sterner than steel, if the very shock shall not destroy them.
It was an evil doom that set her in his path. For she is a fair maiden,
fairest lady of a house of queens. And yet I know not how I should
speak of her. When I ﬁrst looked on her and perceived her unhappiness, it seemed to me that I saw a white ﬂower standing straight and
proud, shapely as a lily, and yet knew that it was hard, as if wrought
by elf-wrights out of steel. Or was it, maybe, a frost that had turned
its sap to ice, and so it stood, bitter-sweet, still fair to see, but stricken,
soon to fall and die? Her malady begins far back before this day, does
´
it not, Eomer?’
‘I marvel that you should ask me, lord,’ he answered. ‘For I hold
´
you blameless in this matter, as in all else; yet I knew not that Eowyn,
my sister, was touched by any frost, until she ﬁrst looked on you.
Care and dread she had, and shared with me, in the days of Wormtongue and the king’s bewitchment; and she tended the king in growing fear. But that did not bring her to this pass!’

THE HOUSES OF HEALING

867

‘My friend,’ said Gandalf, ‘you had horses, and deeds of arms,
and the free ﬁelds; but she, born in the body of a maid, had a spirit
and courage at least the match of yours. Yet she was doomed to wait
upon an old man, whom she loved as a father, and watch him falling
into a mean dishonoured dotage; and her part seemed to her more
ignoble than that of the staff he leaned on.
‘Think you that Wormtongue had poison only for Théoden’s ears?
Dotard! What is the house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands
drink in the reek, and their brats roll on the ﬂoor among their dogs? Have
you not heard those words before? Saruman spoke them, the teacher
of Wormtongue. Though I do not doubt that Wormtongue at home
wrapped their meaning in terms more cunning. My lord, if your
sister’s love for you, and her will still bent to her duty, had not
restrained her lips, you might have heard even such things as these
escape them. But who knows what she spoke to the darkness, alone,
in the bitter watches of the night, when all her life seemed shrinking,
and the walls of her bower closing in about her, a hutch to trammel
some wild thing in?’
´
Then Eomer
was silent, and looked on his sister, as if pondering
anew all the days of their past life together. But Aragorn said: ‘I saw
´
also what you saw, Eomer.
Few other griefs amid the ill chances of this
world have more bitterness and shame for a man’s heart than to behold
the love of a lady so fair and brave that cannot be returned. Sorrow and
pity have followed me ever since I left her desperate in Dunharrow and
rode to the Paths of the Dead; and no fear upon that way was so
´
present as the fear for what might befall her. And yet, Eomer,
I say
to you that she loves you more truly than me; for you she loves and
knows; but in me she loves only a shadow and a thought: a hope of
glory and great deeds, and lands far from the ﬁelds of Rohan.
‘I have, maybe, the power to heal her body, and to recall her from
the dark valley. But to what she will awake: hope, or forgetfulness,
or despair, I do not know. And if to despair, then she will die, unless
other healing comes which I cannot bring. Alas! for her deeds have
set her among the queens of great renown.’
Then Aragorn stooped and looked in her face, and it was indeed
white as a lily, cold as frost, and hard as graven stone. But he bent
and kissed her on the brow, and called her softly, saying:
´
´
‘Eowyn
Eomund’s
daughter, awake! For your enemy has passed
away!’
She did not stir, but now she began again to breathe deeply, so
that her breast rose and fell beneath the white linen of the sheet.
Once more Aragorn bruised two leaves of athelas and cast them into
steaming water; and he laved her brow with it, and her right arm
lying cold and nerveless on the coverlet.

868

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Then, whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten power of Wes´
ternesse, or whether it was but his words of the Lady Eowyn
that
wrought on them, as the sweet inﬂuence of the herb stole about the
chamber it seemed to those who stood by that a keen wind blew
through the window, and it bore no scent, but was an air wholly
fresh and clean and young, as if it had not before been breathed by
any living thing and came new-made from snowy mountains high
beneath a dome of stars, or from shores of silver far away washed by
seas of foam.
´
‘Awake, Eowyn,
Lady of Rohan!’ said Aragorn again, and he took
her right hand in his and felt it warm with life returning. ‘Awake!
The shadow is gone and all darkness is washed clean!’ Then he laid
´
her hand in Eomer’s
and stepped away. ‘Call her!’ he said, and he
passed silently from the chamber.
´
´
´
‘Eowyn,
Eowyn!’
cried Eomer
amid his tears. But she opened her
´
eyes and said: ‘Eomer!
What joy is this? For they said that you were
slain. Nay, but that was only the dark voices in my dream. How long
have I been dreaming?’
´
‘Not long, my sister,’ said Eomer.
‘But think no more on it!’
‘I am strangely weary,’ she said. ‘I must rest a little. But tell me,
what of the Lord of the Mark? Alas! Do not tell me that that was a
dream; for I know that it was not. He is dead as he foresaw.’
´
´
‘He is dead,’ said Eomer,
‘but he bade me say farewell to Eowyn,
dearer than daughter. He lies now in great honour in the Citadel of
Gondor.’
‘That is grievous,’ she said. ‘And yet it is good beyond all that I
dared hope in the dark days, when it seemed that the House of Eorl
was sunk in honour less than any shepherd’s cot. And what of the
´
king’s esquire, the Halﬂing? Eomer,
you shall make him a knight of
the Riddermark, for he is valiant!’
‘He lies nearby in this House, and I will go to him,’ said Gandalf.
´
‘Eomer
shall stay here for a while. But do not speak yet of war or
woe, until you are made whole again. Great gladness it is to see you
wake again to health and hope, so valiant a lady!’
´
‘To health?’ said Eowyn.
‘It may be so. At least while there is an
empty saddle of some fallen Rider that I can ﬁll, and there are deeds
to do. But to hope? I do not know.’
Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry’s room, and there they found
Aragorn standing by the bed. ‘Poor old Merry!’ cried Pippin, and he
ran to the bedside, for it seemed to him that his friend looked worse
and a greyness was in his face, as if a weight of years of sorrow lay
on him; and suddenly a fear seized Pippin that Merry would die.
‘Do not be afraid,’ said Aragorn. ‘I came in time, and I have called

THE HOUSES OF HEALING

869

him back. He is weary now, and grieved, and he has taken a hurt
´
like the Lady Eowyn,
daring to smite that deadly thing. But these
evils can be amended, so strong and gay a spirit is in him. His grief
he will not forget; but it will not darken his heart, it will teach him
wisdom.’
Then Aragorn laid his hand on Merry’s head, and passing his hand
gently through the brown curls, he touched the eyelids, and called
him by name. And when the fragrance of athelas stole through the
room, like the scent of orchards, and of heather in the sunshine full
of bees, suddenly Merry awoke, and he said:
‘I am hungry. What is the time?’
‘Past supper-time now,’ said Pippin; ‘though I daresay I could
bring you something, if they will let me.’
‘They will indeed,’ said Gandalf. ‘And anything else that this Rider
of Rohan may desire, if it can be found in Minas Tirith, where his
name is in honour.’
‘Good!’ said Merry. ‘Then I would like supper ﬁrst, and after that
a pipe.’ At that his face clouded. ‘No, not a pipe. I don’t think I’ll
smoke again.’
‘Why not?’ said Pippin.
‘Well,’ answered Merry slowly. ‘He is dead. It has brought it all
back to me. He said he was sorry he had never had a chance of
talking herb-lore with me. Almost the last thing he ever said. I shan’t
ever be able to smoke again without thinking of him, and that day,
Pippin, when he rode up to Isengard and was so polite.’
‘Smoke then, and think of him!’ said Aragorn. ‘For he was a gentle
heart and a great king and kept his oaths; and he rose out of the
shadows to a last fair morning. Though your service to him was
brief, it should be a memory glad and honourable to the end of your
days.’
Merry smiled. ‘Well then,’ he said, ‘if Strider will provide what
is needed, I will smoke and think. I had some of Saruman’s best in
my pack, but what became of it in the battle, I am sure I don’t
know.’
‘Master Meriadoc,’ said Aragorn, ‘if you think that I have passed
through the mountains and the realm of Gondor with ﬁre and sword
to bring herbs to a careless soldier who throws away his gear, you
are mistaken. If your pack has not been found, then you must send
for the herb-master of this House. And he will tell you that he did
not know that the herb you desire had any virtues, but that it is called
westmansweed by the vulgar, and galenas by the noble, and other names
in other tongues more learned, and after adding a few half-forgotten
rhymes that he does not understand, he will regretfully inform you
that there is none in the House, and he will leave you to reﬂect on

870

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the history of tongues. And so now must I. For I have not slept in
such a bed as this, since I rode from Dunharrow, nor eaten since the
dark before dawn.’
Merry seized his hand and kissed it. ‘I am frightfully sorry,’ he
said. ‘Go at once! Ever since that night at Bree we have been a
nuisance to you. But it is the way of my people to use light words at
such times and say less than they mean. We fear to say too much. It
robs us of the right words when a jest is out of place.’
‘I know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way,’
said Aragorn. ‘May the Shire live for ever unwithered!’ And kissing
Merry he went out, and Gandalf went with him.
Pippin remained behind. ‘Was there ever anyone like him?’ he
said. ‘Except Gandalf, of course. I think they must be related. My
dear ass, your pack is lying by your bed, and you had it on your back
when I met you. He saw it all the time, of course. And anyway I
have some stuff of my own. Come on now! Longbottom Leaf it is.
Fill up while I run and see about some food. And then let’s be easy
for a bit. Dear me! We Tooks and Brandybucks, we can’t live long
on the heights.’
‘No,’ said Merry. ‘I can’t. Not yet, at any rate. But at least, Pippin,
we can now see them, and honour them. It is best to love ﬁrst what
you are ﬁtted to love, I suppose: you must start somewhere and have
some roots, and the soil of the Shire is deep. Still there are things
deeper and higher; and not a gaffer could tend his garden in what
he calls peace but for them, whether he knows about them or not. I
am glad that I know about them, a little. But I don’t know why I am
talking like this. Where is that leaf ? And get my pipe out of my pack,
if it isn’t broken.’
Aragorn and Gandalf went now to the Warden of the Houses of
´
Healing, and they counselled him that Faramir and Eowyn
should
remain there and still be tended with care for many days.
´
‘The Lady Eowyn,’
said Aragorn, ‘will wish soon to rise and depart;
but she should not be permitted to do so, if you can in any way
restrain her, until at least ten days be passed.’
‘As for Faramir,’ said Gandalf, ‘he must soon learn that his father
is dead. But the full tale of the madness of Denethor should not be
told to him, until he is quite healed and has duties to do. See that
Beregond and the perian who were present do not speak to him of
these things yet!’
‘And the other perian, Meriadoc, who is under my care, what of
him?’ said the Warden.
‘It is likely that he will be ﬁt to arise tomorrow, for a short while,’

THE HOUSES OF HEALING

871

said Aragorn. ‘Let him do so, if he wishes. He may walk a little in
the care of his friends.’
‘They are a remarkable race,’ said the Warden, nodding his head.
‘Very tough in the ﬁbre, I deem.’
At the doors of the Houses many were already gathered to see
Aragorn, and they followed after him; and when at last he had supped,
men came and prayed that he would heal their kinsmen or their
friends whose lives were in peril through hurt or wound, or who lay
under the Black Shadow. And Aragorn arose and went out, and he
sent for the sons of Elrond, and together they laboured far into the
night. And word went through the City: ‘The King is come again
indeed.’ And they named him Elfstone, because of the green stone
that he wore, and so the name which it was foretold at his birth that
he should bear was chosen for him by his own people.
And when he could labour no more, he cast his cloak about him,
and slipped out of the City, and went to his tent just ere dawn and
slept for a little. And in the morning the banner of Dol Amroth, a
white ship like a swan upon blue water, ﬂoated from the Tower, and
men looked up and wondered if the coming of the King had been
but a dream.

Chapter 9
THE LAST DEBATE
The morning came after the day of battle, and it was fair with light
clouds and the wind turning westward. Legolas and Gimli were early
abroad, and they begged leave to go up into the City; for they were
eager to see Merry and Pippin.
‘It is good to learn that they are still alive,’ said Gimli; ‘for they
cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have
such pains all wasted.’
Together the Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk
that saw them pass marvelled to see such companions; for Legolas was
fair of face beyond the measure of Men, and he sang an elven-song in
a clear voice as he walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked beside
him, stroking his beard and staring about him.
‘There is some good stone-work here,’ he said as he looked at the
walls; ‘but also some that is less good, and the streets could be better
contrived. When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer him the
service of stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a
town to be proud of.’
‘They need more gardens,’ said Legolas. ‘The houses are dead,
and there is too little here that grows and is glad. If Aragorn comes
into his own, the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing
and trees that do not die.’
At length they came to the Prince Imrahil, and Legolas looked at
him and bowed low; for he saw that here indeed was one who had
elven-blood in his veins. ‘Hail, lord!’ he said. ‘It is long since the
people of Nimrodel left the woodlands of Lórien, and yet still one
may see that not all sailed from Amroth’s haven west over water.’
‘So it is said in the lore of my land,’ said the Prince; ‘yet never
has one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And
I marvel to see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war. What
do you seek?’
‘I am one of the Nine Companions who set out with Mithrandir
from Imladris,’ said Legolas; ‘and with this Dwarf, my friend, I came
with the Lord Aragorn. But now we wish to see our friends, Meriadoc
and Peregrin, who are in your keeping, we are told.’
‘You will ﬁnd them in the Houses of Healing, and I will lead you
thither,’ said Imrahil.
‘It will be enough if you send one to guide us, lord,’ said Legolas.

THE LAST DEBATE

873

‘For Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish to enter
the City again at this time. Yet there is need for the captains to hold
´
council at once, and he prays that you and Eomer
of Rohan will
come down to his tents, as soon as may be. Mithrandir is already
there.’
‘We will come,’ said Imrahil; and they parted with courteous
words.
‘That is a fair lord and a great captain of men,’ said Legolas. ‘If
Gondor has such men still in these days of fading, great must have
been its glory in the days of its rising.’
‘And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and was wrought
in the ﬁrst building,’ said Gimli. ‘It is ever so with the things that
Men begin: there is a frost in Spring, or a blight in Summer, and
they fail of their promise.’
‘Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,’ said Legolas. ‘And that
will lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places
unlooked-for. The deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.’
‘And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess,’
said the Dwarf.
‘To that the Elves know not the answer,’ said Legolas.
With that the servant of the Prince came and led them to the
Houses of Healing; and there they found their friends in the garden,
and their meeting was a merry one. For a while they walked and
talked, rejoicing for a brief space in peace and rest under the morning
high up in the windy circles of the City. Then when Merry became
weary, they went and sat upon the wall with the greensward of the
Houses of Healing behind them; and away southward before them
was the Anduin glittering in the sun, as it ﬂowed away, out of the
sight even of Legolas, into the wide ﬂats and green haze of Lebennin
and South Ithilien.
And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked
out against the sun, and as he gazed he saw white sea-birds beating
up the River.
‘Look!’ he cried. ‘Gulls! They are ﬂying far inland. A wonder they
are to me and a trouble to my heart. Never in all my life had I met
them, until we came to Pelargir, and there I heard them crying in
the air as we rode to the battle of the ships. Then I stood still,
forgetting war in Middle-earth; for their wailing voices spoke to me
of the Sea. The Sea! Alas! I have not yet beheld it. But deep in the
hearts of all my kindred lies the sea-longing, which it is perilous to
stir. Alas! for the gulls. No peace shall I have again under beech or
under elm.’
‘Say not so!’ said Gimli. ‘There are countless things still to see in

THE LAST DEBATE

877

and broke his spear and cast it down. Then he bowed low and turned
away; and swiftly the whole grey host drew off and vanished like a
mist that is driven back by a sudden wind; and it seemed to me that
I awoke from a dream.
‘That night we rested while others laboured. For there were many
captives set free, and many slaves released who had been folk of
Gondor taken in raids; and soon also there was a great gathering of
men out of Lebennin and the Ethir, and Angbor of Lamedon came
up with all the horsemen that he could muster. Now that the fear of
the Dead was removed they came to aid us and to look on the Heir
of Isildur; for the rumour of that name had run like ﬁre in the dark.
‘And that is near the end of our tale. For during that evening and
night many ships were made ready and manned; and in the morning
the ﬂeet set forth. Long past it now seems, yet it was but the morn
of the day ere yesterday, the sixth since we rode from Dunharrow.
But still Aragorn was driven by fear that time was too short.
‘ ‘‘It is forty leagues and two from Pelargir to the landings at the
Harlond,’’ he said. ‘‘Yet to the Harlond we must come tomorrow or
fail utterly.’’
‘The oars were now wielded by free men, and manfully they
laboured; yet slowly we passed up the Great River, for we strove
against its stream, and though that is not swift down in the South,
we had no help of wind. Heavy would my heart have been, for all
our victory at the havens, if Legolas had not laughed suddenly.
‘ ‘‘Up with your beard, Durin’s son!’’ he said. ‘‘For thus is it
spoken: Oft hope is born, when all is forlorn.’’ But what hope he saw
from afar he would not tell. When night came it did but deepen the
darkness, and our hearts were hot, for away in the North we saw
a red glow under the cloud, and Aragorn said: ‘‘Minas Tirith is
burning.’’
‘But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea-crafty men of
the Ethir gazing southward spoke of a change coming with a fresh
wind from the Sea. Long ere day the masted ships hoisted sail, and
our speed grew, until dawn whitened the foam at our prows. And so
it was, as you know, that we came in the third hour of the morning
with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled, and we unfurled the great
standard in battle. It was a great day and a great hour, whatever may
come after.’
‘Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,’ said
Legolas. ‘Great deed was the riding of the Paths of the Dead, and
great it shall remain, though none be left in Gondor to sing of it in
the days that are to come.’
‘And that may well befall,’ said Gimli. ‘For the faces of Aragorn
and Gandalf are grave. Much I wonder what counsels they are taking

878

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in the tents there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with
our victory the war was now over. Yet whatever is still to do, I hope
to have a part in it, for the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.’
‘And I for the folk of the Great Wood,’ said Legolas, ‘and for the
love of the Lord of the White Tree.’
Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the
high place, each busy with his own thoughts, while the Captains
debated.
When the Prince Imrahil had parted from Legolas and Gimli, at
´
once he sent for Eomer;
and he went down with him from the City,
and they came to the tents of Aragorn that were set up on the ﬁeld
not far from the place where King Théoden had fallen. And there
they took counsel together with Gandalf and Aragorn and the sons
of Elrond.
‘My lords,’ said Gandalf, ‘listen to the words of the Steward of
Gondor before he died: You may triumph on the ﬁelds of the Pelennor
for a day, but against the Power that has now arisen there is no victory.
I do not bid you despair, as he did, but to ponder the truth in these
words.
‘The Stones of Seeing do not lie, and not even the Lord of Baraddûr can make them do so. He can, maybe, by his will choose what
things shall be seen by weaker minds, or cause them to mistake the
meaning of what they see. Nonetheless it cannot be doubted that
when Denethor saw great forces arrayed against him in Mordor, and
more still being gathered, he saw that which truly is.
‘Hardly has our strength sufﬁced to beat off the ﬁrst great assault.
The next will be greater. This war then is without ﬁnal hope, as
Denethor perceived. Victory cannot be achieved by arms, whether
you sit here to endure siege after siege, or march out to be overwhelmed beyond the River. You have only a choice of evils; and
prudence would counsel you to strengthen such strong places as you
have, and there await the onset; for so shall the time before your end
be made a little longer.’
‘Then you would have us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol Amroth,
or to Dunharrow, and there sit like children on sand-castles when
the tide is ﬂowing?’ said Imrahil.
‘That would be no new counsel,’ said Gandalf. ‘Have you not
done this and little more in all the days of Denethor? But no! I said
this would be prudent. I do not counsel prudence. I said victory
could not be achieved by arms. I still hope for victory, but not by
arms. For into the midst of all these policies comes the Ring of Power,
the foundation of Barad-dûr, and the hope of Sauron.
‘Concerning this thing, my lords, you now all know enough for

THE LAST DEBATE

879

the understanding of our plight, and of Sauron’s. If he regains it,
your valour is vain, and his victory will be swift and complete: so
complete that none can foresee the end of it while this world lasts.
If it is destroyed, then he will fall; and his fall will be so low that
none can foresee his arising ever again. For he will lose the best part
of the strength that was native to him in his beginning, and all that
was made or begun with that power will crumble, and he will be
maimed for ever, becoming a mere spirit of malice that gnaws itself
in the shadows, but cannot again grow or take shape. And so a great
evil of this world will be removed.
‘Other evils there are that may come; for Sauron is himself but a
servant or emissary. Yet it is not our part to master all the tides of
the world, but to do what is in us for the succour of those years
wherein we are set, uprooting the evil in the ﬁelds that we know, so
that those who live after may have clean earth to till. What weather
they shall have is not ours to rule.
‘Now Sauron knows all this, and he knows that this precious thing
which he lost has been found again; but he does not yet know where
it is, or so we hope. And therefore he is now in great doubt. For if
we have found this thing, there are some among us with strength
enough to wield it. That too he knows. For do I not guess rightly,
Aragorn, that you have shown yourself to him in the Stone of
Orthanc?’
‘I did so ere I rode from the Hornburg,’ answered Aragorn. ‘I
deemed that the time was ripe, and that the Stone had come to me
for just such a purpose. It was then ten days since the Ring-bearer
went east from Rauros, and the Eye of Sauron, I thought, should be
drawn out from his own land. Too seldom has he been challenged
since he returned to his Tower. Though if I had foreseen how swift
would be his onset in answer, maybe I should not have dared to show
myself. Bare time was given me to come to your aid.’
´
‘But how is this?’ asked Eomer.
‘All is vain, you say, if he has the
Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?’
‘He is not yet sure,’ said Gandalf, ‘and he has not built up his
power by waiting until his enemies are secure, as we have done. Also
we could not learn how to wield the full power all in a day. Indeed
it can be used only by one master alone, not by many; and he will
look for a time of strife, ere one of the great among us makes himself
master and puts down the others. In that time the Ring might aid
him, if he were sudden.
‘He is watching. He sees much and hears much. His Nazgûl are
still abroad. They passed over this ﬁeld ere the sunrise, though few
of the weary and sleeping were aware of them. He studies the signs:
the Sword that robbed him of his treasure re-made; the winds of

880

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

fortune turning in our favour, and the defeat unlooked-for of his ﬁrst
assault; the fall of his great Captain.
‘His doubt will be growing, even as we speak here. His Eye is now
straining towards us, blind almost to all else that is moving. So we
must keep it. Therein lies all our hope. This, then, is my counsel.
We have not the Ring. In wisdom or great folly it has been sent away
to be destroyed, lest it destroy us. Without it we cannot by force
defeat his force. But we must at all costs keep his Eye from his true
peril. We cannot achieve victory by arms, but by arms we can give
the Ring-bearer his only chance, frail though it be.
‘As Aragorn has begun, so we must go on. We must push Sauron
to his last throw. We must call out his hidden strength, so that he
shall empty his land. We must march out to meet him at once. We
must make ourselves the bait, though his jaws should close on us.
He will take that bait, in hope and in greed, for he will think that in
such rashness he sees the pride of the new Ringlord: and he will say:
‘‘So! he pushes out his neck too soon and too far. Let him come on,
and behold I will have him in a trap from which he cannot escape.
There I will crush him, and what he has taken in his insolence shall
be mine again for ever.’’
‘We must walk open-eyed into that trap, with courage, but small
hope for ourselves. For, my lords, it may well prove that we ourselves
shall perish utterly in a black battle far from the living lands; so that
even if Barad-dûr be thrown down, we shall not live to see a new
age. But this, I deem, is our duty. And better so than to perish
nonetheless – as we surely shall, if we sit here – and know as we die
that no new age shall be.’
They were silent for a while. At length Aragorn spoke. ‘As I have
begun, so I will go on. We come now to the very brink, where hope
and despair are akin. To waver is to fall. Let none now reject the
counsels of Gandalf, whose long labours against Sauron come at last
to their test. But for him all would long ago have been lost. Nonetheless I do not yet claim to command any man. Let others choose as
they will.’
Then said Elrohir: ‘From the North we came with this purpose,
and from Elrond our father we brought this very counsel. We will
not turn back.’
´
‘As for myself,’ said Eomer,
‘I have little knowledge of these deep
matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough, that as my
friend Aragorn succoured me and my people, so I will aid him when
he calls. I will go.’
‘As for me,’ said Imrahil, ‘the Lord Aragorn I hold to be my
liege-lord, whether he claim it or no. His wish is to me a command.

THE LAST DEBATE

881

I will go also. Yet for a while I stand in the place of the Steward of
Gondor, and it is mine to think ﬁrst of its people. To prudence some
heed must still be given. For we must prepare against all chances,
good as well as evil. Now, it may be that we shall triumph, and while
there is any hope of this, Gondor must be protected. I would not
have us return with victory to a City in ruins and a land ravaged
behind us. And yet we learn from the Rohirrim that there is an army
still unfought upon our northern ﬂank.’
‘That is true,’ said Gandalf. ‘I do not counsel you to leave the
City all unmanned. Indeed the force that we lead east need not be
great enough for any assault in earnest upon Mordor, so long as it be
great enough to challenge battle. And it must move soon. Therefore I
ask the Captains: what force could we muster and lead out in two
days’ time at the latest? And they must be hardy men that go willingly,
knowing their peril.’
‘All are weary, and very many have wounds light or grievous,’ said
Éomer, ‘and we have suffered much loss of our horses, and that is
ill to bear. If we must ride soon, then I cannot hope to lead even
two thousands, and yet leave as many for the defence of the City.’
‘We have not only to reckon with those who fought on this ﬁeld,’
said Aragorn. ‘New strength is on the way from the southern ﬁefs,
now that the coasts have been rid. Four thousands I sent marching
from Pelargir through Lossarnach two days ago; and Angbor the
fearless rides before them. If we set out in two days more, they will
draw nigh ere we depart. Moreover many were bidden to follow me
up the River in any craft they could gather; and with this wind they
will soon be at hand, indeed several ships have already come to the
Harlond. I judge that we could lead out seven thousands of horse
and foot, and yet leave the City in better defence than it was when
the assault began.’
‘The Gate is destroyed,’ said Imrahil, ‘and where now is the skill
to rebuild it and set it up anew?’
‘In Erebor in the Kingdom of Dáin there is such skill,’ said Aragorn; ‘and if all our hopes do not perish, then in time I will send
Gimli Glóin’s son to ask for wrights of the Mountain. But men are
better than gates, and no gate will endure against our Enemy if men
desert it.’
This then was the end of the debate of the lords: that they should
set forth on the second morning from that day with seven thousands,
if these might be found; and the great part of this force should be
on foot, because of the evil lands into which they would go. Aragorn
should ﬁnd some two thousands of those that he had gathered to
him in the South; but Imrahil should ﬁnd three and a half thousands;

882

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

´
and Eomer
ﬁve hundreds of the Rohirrim who were unhorsed but
themselves warworthy, and he himself should lead ﬁve hundreds of
his best Riders on horse; and another company of ﬁve hundred horse
there should be, among which should ride the sons of Elrond with
the Dúnedain and the knights of Dol Amroth: all told six thousand
foot and a thousand horse. But the main strength of the Rohirrim
that remained horsed and able to ﬁght, some three thousand under
the command of Elfhelm, should waylay the West Road against the
enemy that was in Anórien. And at once swift riders were sent out
to gather what news they could northwards; and eastwards from
Osgiliath and the road to Minas Morgul.
And when they had reckoned up all their strength and taken
thought for the journeys they should make and the roads they should
choose, Imrahil suddenly laughed aloud.
‘Surely,’ he cried, ‘this is the greatest jest in all the history of
Gondor: that we should ride with seven thousands, scarce as many
as the vanguard of its army in the days of its power, to assail the
mountains and the impenetrable gate of the Black Land! So might a
child threaten a mail-clad knight with a bow of string and green
willow! If the Dark Lord knows so much as you say, Mithrandir, will
he not rather smile than fear, and with his little ﬁnger crush us like
a ﬂy that tries to sting him?’
‘No, he will try to trap the ﬂy and take the sting,’ said Gandalf.
‘And there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand
mail-clad knights apiece. No, he will not smile.’
‘Neither shall we,’ said Aragorn. ‘If this be jest, then it is too bitter
for laughter. Nay, it is the last move in a great jeopardy, and for one
side or the other it will bring the end of the game.’ Then he drew
Andúril and held it up glittering in the sun. ‘You shall not be sheathed
again until the last battle is fought,’ he said.

Chapter 10
THE BLACK GATE OPENS
Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the
Pelennor. The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of
Anórien, but harried and scattered by the Rohirrim they had broken
and ﬂed with little ﬁghting towards Cair Andros; and with that threat
destroyed and new strength arriving out of the South the City was
as well manned as might be. Scouts reported that no enemies
remained upon the roads east as far as the Cross-roads of the Fallen
King. All now was ready for the last throw.
Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of
Aragorn and Gandalf, who went in the van with the Dúnedain and
the sons of Elrond. But Merry to his shame was not to go with them.
‘You are not ﬁt for such a journey,’ said Aragorn. ‘But do not be
ashamed. If you do no more in this war, you have already earned
great honour. Peregrin shall go and represent the Shire-folk; and do
not grudge him his chance of peril, for though he has done as well
as his fortune allowed him, he has yet to match your deed. But in
truth all now are in like danger. Though it may be our part to ﬁnd
a bitter end before the Gate of Mordor, if we do so, then you will
come also to a last stand, either here or wherever the black tide
overtakes you. Farewell!’
And so despondently Merry now stood and watched the mustering
of the army. Bergil was with him, and he also was downcast; for his
father was to march leading a company of the Men of the City: he
could not rejoin the Guard until his case was judged. In that same
company Pippin was also to go, as a soldier of Gondor. Merry could
see him not far off, a small but upright ﬁgure among the tall men of
Minas Tirith.
At last the trumpets rang and the army began to move. Troop by
troop, and company by company, they wheeled and went off eastward. And long after they had passed away out of sight down the
great road to the Causeway, Merry stood there. The last glint of the
morning sun on spear and helm twinkled and was lost, and still he
remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling friendless and
alone. Everyone that he cared for had gone away into the gloom that
hung over the distant eastern sky; and little hope at all was left in his
heart that he would ever see any of them again.
As if recalled by his mood of despair, the pain in his arm returned,

884

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and he felt weak and old, and the sunlight seemed thin. He was
roused by the touch of Bergil’s hand.
‘Come, Master Perian!’ said the lad. ‘You are still in pain, I see.
I will help you back to the Healers. But do not fear! They will come
back. The Men of Minas Tirith will never be overcome. And now
they have the Lord Elfstone, and Beregond of the Guard too.’
Ere noon the army came to Osgiliath. There all the workers and
craftsmen that could be spared were busy. Some were strengthening
the ferries and boat-bridges that the enemy had made and in part
destroyed when they ﬂed; some gathered stores and booty; and others
on the eastern side across the River were throwing up hasty works
of defence.
The vanguard passed on through the ruins of Old Gondor, and
over the wide River, and on up the long straight road that in the high
days had been made to run from the fair Tower of the Sun to the
tall Tower of the Moon, which now was Minas Morgul in its accursed
vale. Five miles beyond Osgiliath they halted, ending their ﬁrst day’s
march.
But the horsemen pressed on and ere evening they came to the
Cross-roads and the great ring of trees, and all was silent. No sign
of any enemy had they seen, no cry or call had been heard, no shaft
had sped from rock or thicket by the way, yet ever as they went
forward they felt the watchfulness of the land increase. Tree and
stone, blade and leaf were listening. The darkness had been dispelled,
and far away westward sunset was on the Vale of Anduin, and the
white peaks of the mountains blushed in the blue air; but a shadow
and a gloom brooded upon the Ephel Dúath.
Then Aragorn set trumpeters at each of the four roads that ran
into the ring of trees, and they blew a great fanfare, and the heralds
cried aloud: ‘The Lords of Gondor have returned and all this land
that is theirs they take back.’ The hideous orc-head that was set upon
the carven ﬁgure was cast down and broken in pieces, and the old
king’s head was raised and set in its place once more, still crowned
with white and golden ﬂowers; and men laboured to wash and pare
away all the foul scrawls that orcs had put upon the stone.
Now in their debate some had counselled that Minas Morgul
should ﬁrst be assailed, and if they might take it, it should be utterly
destroyed. ‘And, maybe,’ said Imrahil, ‘the road that leads thence to
the pass above will prove an easier way of assault upon the Dark
Lord than his northern gate.’
But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of the evil
that dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn
to madness and horror, and because also of the news that Faramir

THE BLACK GATE OPENS

885

had brought. For if the Ring-bearer had indeed attempted that way,
then above all they should not draw the Eye of Mordor thither. So
the next day when the main host came up, they set a strong guard
upon the Cross-roads to make some defence, if Mordor should send
a force over the Morgul Pass, or should bring more men up from
the South. For that guard they chose mostly archers who knew the
ways of Ithilien and would lie hid in the woods and slopes about
the meeting of the ways. But Gandalf and Aragorn rode with the
vanguard to the entrance of Morgul Vale and looked on the evil
city.
It was dark and lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of Mordor
that had dwelt there had been destroyed in battle, and the Nazgûl
were abroad. Yet the air of the valley was heavy with fear and enmity.
Then they broke the evil bridge and set red ﬂames in the noisome
ﬁelds and departed.
The day after, being the third day since they set out from Minas
Tirith, the army began its northward march along the road. It was
some hundred miles by that way from the Cross-roads to the Morannon, and what might befall them before they came so far none knew.
They went openly but heedfully, with mounted scouts before them
on the road, and others on foot upon either side, especially on the
eastward ﬂank; for there lay dark thickets, and a tumbled land of
rocky ghylls and crags, behind which the long grim slopes of the
Ephel Dúath clambered up. The weather of the world remained fair,
and the wind held in the west, but nothing could waft away the
glooms and the sad mists that clung about the Mountains of Shadow;
and behind them at whiles great smokes would arise and hover in
the upper winds.
Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets, and the heralds
would cry: ‘The Lords of Gondor are come! Let all leave this land
or yield them up!’ But Imrahil said: ‘Say not The Lords of Gondor.
Say The King Elessar. For that is true, even though he has not yet sat
upon the throne; and it will give the Enemy more thought, if the
heralds use that name.’ And thereafter thrice a day the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar. But none answered the
challenge.
Nonetheless, though they marched in seeming peace, the hearts
of all the army, from the highest to the lowest, were downcast, and
with every mile that they went north foreboding of evil grew heavier
on them. It was near the end of the second day of their march from
the Cross-roads that they ﬁrst met any offer of battle. For a strong
force of Orcs and Easterlings attempted to take their leading companies in an ambush; and that was in the very place where Faramir

888

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

trumpeters. There was Gandalf as chief herald, and Aragorn with
´
the sons of Elrond, and Eomer
of Rohan, and Imrahil; and Legolas
and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to go also, so that all the enemies
of Mordor should have a witness.
They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner,
and blew upon their trumpets; and the heralds stood out and sent
their voices up over the battlement of Mordor.
‘Come forth!’ they cried. ‘Let the Lord of the Black Land come
forth! Justice shall be done upon him. For wrongfully he has made war
upon Gondor and wrested its lands. Therefore the King of Gondor
demands that he should atone for his evils, and depart then for ever.
Come forth!’
There was a long silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound
was heard in answer. But Sauron had already laid his plans, and he
had a mind ﬁrst to play these mice cruelly before he struck to kill.
So it was that, even as the Captains were about to turn away, the
silence was broken suddenly. There came a long rolling of great
drums like thunder in the mountains, and then a braying of horns
that shook the very stones and stunned men’s ears. And thereupon
the door of the Black Gate was thrown open with a great clang, and
out of it there came an embassy from the Dark Tower.
At its head there rode a tall and evil shape, mounted upon a black
horse, if horse it was; for it was huge and hideous, and its face was
a frightful mask, more like a skull than a living head, and in the
sockets of its eyes and in its nostrils there burned a ﬂame. The rider
was robed all in black, and black was his lofty helm; yet this was no
Ringwraith but a living man. The Lieutenant of the Tower of Baraddûr he was, and his name is remembered in no tale; for he himself
had forgotten it, and he said: ‘I am the Mouth of Sauron.’ But it is
told that he was a renegade, who came of the race of those that are
named the Black Númenóreans; for they established their dwellings
in Middle-earth during the years of Sauron’s domination, and they
worshipped him, being enamoured of evil knowledge. And he entered
the service of the Dark Tower when it ﬁrst rose again, and because
of his cunning he grew ever higher in the Lord’s favour; and he
learned great sorcery, and knew much of the mind of Sauron; and
he was more cruel than any orc.
He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small
company of black-harnessed soldiery, and a single banner, black but
bearing on it in red the Evil Eye. Now halting a few paces before the
Captains of the West he looked them up and down and laughed.
‘Is there anyone in this rout with authority to treat with me?’ he
asked. ‘Or indeed with wit to understand me? Not thou at least!’ he
mocked, turning to Aragorn with scorn. ‘It needs more to make a

THE BLACK GATE OPENS

889

king than a piece of Elvish glass, or a rabble such as this. Why, any
brigand of the hills can show as good a following!’
Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other’s eye and
held it, and for a moment they strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn
did not stir nor move hand to weapon, the other quailed and gave
back as if menaced with a blow. ‘I am a herald and ambassador, and
may not be assailed!’ he cried.
‘Where such laws hold,’ said Gandalf, ‘it is also the custom for
ambassadors to use less insolence. But no one has threatened you.
You have naught to fear from us, until your errand is done. But
unless your master has come to new wisdom, then with all his servants
you will be in great peril.’
‘So!’ said the Messenger. ‘Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard? Have we not heard of thee at whiles, and of thy wanderings,
ever hatching plots and mischief at a safe distance? But this time
thou hast stuck out thy nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt
see what comes to him who sets his foolish webs before the feet of
Sauron the Great. I have tokens that I was bidden to show to thee
– to thee in especial, if thou shouldst dare to come.’ He signed to
one of his guards, and he came forward bearing a bundle swathed
in black cloths.
The Messenger put these aside, and there to the wonder and
dismay of all the Captains he held up ﬁrst the short sword that Sam
had carried, and next a grey cloak with an elven-brooch, and last the
coat of mithril-mail that Frodo had worn wrapped in his tattered
garments. A blackness came before their eyes, and it seemed to them
in a moment of silence that the world stood still, but their hearts
were dead and their last hope gone. Pippin who stood behind Prince
Imrahil sprang forward with a cry of grief.
‘Silence!’ said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back; but the Messenger laughed aloud.
‘So you have yet another of these imps with you!’ he cried. ‘What
use you ﬁnd in them I cannot guess; but to send them as spies into
Mordor is beyond even your accustomed folly. Still, I thank him, for
it is plain that this brat at least has seen these tokens before, and it
would be vain for you to deny them now.’
‘I do not wish to deny them,’ said Gandalf. ‘Indeed, I know them
all and all their history, and despite your scorn, foul Mouth of Sauron,
you cannot say as much. But why do you bring them here?’
‘Dwarf-coat, elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from
the little rat-land of the Shire – nay, do not start! We know it well –
here are the marks of a conspiracy. Now, maybe he that bore these
things was a creature that you would not grieve to lose, and maybe
otherwise: one dear to you, perhaps? If so, take swift counsel with

890

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

what little wit is left to you. For Sauron does not love spies, and
what his fate shall be depends now on your choice.’
No one answered him; but he saw their faces grey with fear and
the horror in their eyes, and he laughed again, for it seemed to him
that his sport went well. ‘Good, good!’ he said. ‘He was dear to you,
I see. Or else his errand was one that you did not wish to fail? It has.
And now he shall endure the slow torment of years, as long and slow
as our arts in the Great Tower can contrive, and never be released,
unless maybe when he is changed and broken, so that he may come
to you, and you shall see what you have done. This shall surely be
unless you accept my Lord’s terms.’
‘Name the terms,’ said Gandalf steadily, but those nearby saw the
anguish in his face, and now he seemed an old and wizened man,
crushed, defeated at last. They did not doubt that he would accept.
‘These are the terms,’ said the Messenger, and smiled as he eyed
them one by one. ‘The rabble of Gondor and its deluded allies shall
withdraw at once beyond the Anduin, ﬁrst taking oaths never again
to assail Sauron the Great in arms, open or secret. All lands east of
the Anduin shall be Sauron’s for ever, solely. West of the Anduin as
far as the Misty Mountains and the Gap of Rohan shall be tributary
to Mordor, and men there shall bear no weapons, but shall have
leave to govern their own affairs. But they shall help to rebuild Isengard which they have wantonly destroyed, and that shall be Sauron’s,
and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more
worthy of trust.’
Looking in the Messenger’s eyes they read his thought. He was
to be that lieutenant, and gather all that remained of the West under
his sway; he would be their tyrant and they his slaves.
But Gandalf said: ‘This is much to demand for the delivery of one
servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must
else ﬁght many a war to gain! Or has the ﬁeld of Gondor destroyed
his hope in war, so that he falls to haggling? And if indeed we rated
this prisoner so high, what surety have we that Sauron, the Base
Master of Treachery, will keep his part? Where is this prisoner? Let
him be brought forth and yielded to us, and then we will consider
these demands.’
It seemed then to Gandalf, intent, watching him as a man engaged
in fencing with a deadly foe, that for the taking of a breath the
Messenger was at a loss; yet swiftly he laughed again.
‘Do not bandy words in your insolence with the Mouth of Sauron!’
he cried. ‘Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his
clemency you must ﬁrst do his bidding. These are his terms. Take
them or leave them!’
‘These we will take!’ said Gandalf suddenly. He cast aside his

THE BLACK GATE OPENS

891

cloak and a white light shone forth like a sword in that black place.
Before his upraised hand the foul Messenger recoiled, and Gandalf
coming seized and took from him the tokens: coat, cloak, and sword.
‘These we will take in memory of our friend,’ he cried. ‘But as for
your terms, we reject them utterly. Get you gone, for your embassy
is over and death is near to you. We did not come here to waste
words in treating with Sauron, faithless and accursed; still less with
one of his slaves. Begone!’
Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was
twisted with amazement and anger to the likeness of some wild beast
that, as it crouches on its prey, is smitten on the muzzle with a
stinging rod. Rage ﬁlled him and his mouth slavered, and shapeless
sounds of fury came strangling from his throat. But he looked at the
fell faces of the Captains and their deadly eyes, and fear overcame
his wrath. He gave a great cry, and turned, leaped upon his steed,
and with his company galloped madly back to Cirith Gorgor. But as
they went his soldiers blew their horns in signal long arranged; and
even before they came to the gate Sauron sprang his trap.
Drums rolled and ﬁres leaped up. The great doors of the Black
Gate swung back wide. Out of it streamed a great host as swiftly as
swirling waters when a sluice is lifted.
The Captains mounted again and rode back, and from the host
of Mordor there went up a jeering yell. Dust rose smothering the air,
as from nearby there marched up an army of Easterlings that had
waited for the signal in the shadows of Ered Lithui beyond the further
Tower. Down from the hills on either side of the Morannon poured
Orcs innumerable. The men of the West were trapped, and soon, all
about the grey mounds where they stood, forces ten times and more
than ten times their match would ring them in a sea of enemies.
Sauron had taken the proffered bait in jaws of steel.
Little time was left to Aragorn for the ordering of his battle. Upon
the one hill he stood with Gandalf, and there fair and desperate was
raised the banner of the Tree and Stars. Upon the other hill hard by
stood the banners of Rohan and Dol Amroth, White Horse and Silver
Swan. And about each hill a ring was made facing all ways, bristling
with spear and sword. But in the front towards Mordor where the
ﬁrst bitter assault would come there stood the sons of Elrond on the
left with the Dúnedain about them, and on the right the Prince
Imrahil with the men of Dol Amroth tall and fair, and picked men
of the Tower of Guard.
The wind blew, and the trumpets sang, and arrows whined; but
the sun now climbing towards the South was veiled in the reeks of
Mordor, and through a threatening haze it gleamed, remote, a sullen

892

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

red, as if it were the ending of the day, or the end maybe of all the
world of light. And out of the gathering mirk the Nazgûl came with
their cold voices crying words of death; and then all hope was
quenched.
Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when he heard Gandalf
reject the terms and doom Frodo to the torment of the Tower; but
he had mastered himself, and now he stood beside Beregond in the
front rank of Gondor with Imrahil’s men. For it seemed best to him
to die soon and leave the bitter story of his life, since all was in ruin.
‘I wish Merry was here,’ he heard himself saying, and quick
thoughts raced through his mind, even as he watched the enemy
come charging to the assault. ‘Well, well, now at any rate I understand
poor Denethor a little better. We might die together, Merry and I,
and since die we must, why not? Well, as he is not here, I hope he’ll
ﬁnd an easier end. But now I must do my best.’
He drew his sword and looked at it, and the intertwining shapes
of red and gold; and the ﬂowing characters of Númenor glinted like
ﬁre upon the blade. ‘This was made for just such an hour,’ he thought.
‘If only I could smite that foul Messenger with it, then almost I
should draw level with old Merry. Well, I’ll smite some of this beastly
brood before the end. I wish I could see cool sunlight and green grass
again!’
Then even as he thought these things the ﬁrst assault crashed into
them. The orcs hindered by the mires that lay before the hills halted
and poured their arrows into the defending ranks. But through them
there came striding up, roaring like beasts, a great company of hilltrolls out of Gorgoroth. Taller and broader than Men they were, and
they were clad only in close-ﬁtting mesh of horny scales, or maybe
that was their hideous hide; but they bore round bucklers huge and
black and wielded heavy hammers in their knotted hands. Reckless
they sprang into the pools and waded across, bellowing as they came.
Like a storm they broke upon the line of the men of Gondor, and
beat upon helm and head, and arm and shield, as smiths hewing
the hot bending iron. At Pippin’s side Beregond was stunned and
overborne, and he fell; and the great troll-chief that smote him down
bent over him, reaching out a clutching claw; for these fell creatures
would bite the throats of those that they threw down.
Then Pippin stabbed upwards, and the written blade of Westernesse pierced through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the
troll, and his black blood came gushing out. He toppled forward and
came crashing down like a falling rock, burying those beneath him.
Blackness and stench and crushing pain came upon Pippin, and his
mind fell away into a great darkness.

934

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

came home to him at last: at best their provision would take them
to their goal; and when the task was done, there they would come
to an end, alone, houseless, foodless in the midst of a terrible desert.
There could be no return.
‘So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started,’ thought
Sam: ‘to help Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well,
if that is the job then I must do it. But I would dearly like to see
Bywater again, and Rosie Cotton and her brothers, and the Gaffer
and Marigold and all. I can’t think somehow that Gandalf would
have sent Mr. Frodo on this errand, if there hadn’t a’ been any hope
of his ever coming back at all. Things all went wrong when he went
down in Moria. I wish he hadn’t. He would have done something.’
But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to die, it was turned to
a new strength. Sam’s plain hobbit-face grew stern, almost grim, as
the will hardened in him, and he felt through all his limbs a thrill,
as if he was turning into some creature of stone and steel that neither
despair nor weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue.
With a new sense of responsibility he brought his eyes back to the
ground near at hand, studying the next move. As the light grew a
little he saw to his surprise that what from a distance had seemed
wide and featureless ﬂats were in fact all broken and tumbled. Indeed
the whole surface of the plains of Gorgoroth was pocked with great
holes, as if, while it was still a waste of soft mud, it had been smitten
with a shower of bolts and huge slingstones. The largest of these
holes were rimmed with ridges of broken rock, and broad ﬁssures
ran out from them in all directions. It was a land in which it would
be possible to creep from hiding to hiding, unseen by all but the
most watchful eyes: possible at least for one who was strong and had
no need for speed. For the hungry and worn, who had far to go
before life failed, it had an evil look.
Thinking of all these things Sam went back to his master. He had
no need to rouse him. Frodo was lying on his back with eyes open,
staring at the cloudy sky. ‘Well, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam, ‘I’ve been
having a look round and thinking a bit. There’s nothing on the roads,
and we’d best be getting away while there’s a chance. Can you manage it?’
‘I can manage it,’ said Frodo. ‘I must.’
Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, ﬂitting
behind such cover as they could ﬁnd, but moving always in a slant
towards the foothills of the northern range. But as they went the
most easterly of the roads followed them, until it ran off, hugging
the skirts of the mountains, away into a wall of black shadow far
ahead. Neither man nor orc now moved along its ﬂat grey stretches;

MOUNT DOOM

947

There was a roar and a great confusion of noise. Fires leaped up
and licked the roof. The throbbing grew to a great tumult, and the
Mountain shook. Sam ran to Frodo and picked him up and carried
him out to the door. And there upon the dark threshold of the Sammath Naur, high above the plains of Mordor, such wonder and terror
came on him that he stood still forgetting all else, and gazed as one
turned to stone.
A brief vision he had of swirling cloud, and in the midst of it
towers and battlements, tall as hills, founded upon a mighty mountain-throne above immeasurable pits; great courts and dungeons,
eyeless prisons sheer as cliffs, and gaping gates of steel and adamant:
and then all passed. Towers fell and mountains slid; walls crumbled
and melted, crashing down; vast spires of smoke and spouting steams
went billowing up, up, until they toppled like an overwhelming wave,
and its wild crest curled and came foaming down upon the land.
And then at last over the miles between there came a rumble, rising
to a deafening crash and roar; the earth shook, the plain heaved and
cracked, and Orodruin reeled. Fire belched from its riven summit.
The skies burst into thunder seared with lightning. Down like lashing
whips fell a torrent of black rain. And into the heart of the storm,
with a cry that pierced all other sounds, tearing the clouds asunder,
the Nazgûl came, shooting like ﬂaming bolts, as caught in the ﬁery
ruin of hill and sky they crackled, withered, and went out.
‘Well, this is the end, Sam Gamgee,’ said a voice by his side. And
there was Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his
eyes there was peace now, neither strain of will, nor madness, nor
any fear. His burden was taken away. There was the dear master of
the sweet days in the Shire.
‘Master!’ cried Sam, and fell upon his knees. In all that ruin of
the world for the moment he felt only joy, great joy. The burden was
gone. His master had been saved; he was himself again, he was free.
And then Sam caught sight of the maimed and bleeding hand.
‘Your poor hand!’ he said. ‘And I have nothing to bind it with, or
comfort it. I would have spared him a whole hand of mine rather.
But he’s gone now beyond recall, gone for ever.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo. ‘But do you remember Gandalf ’s words: Even
Gollum may have something yet to do? But for him, Sam, I could not
have destroyed the Ring. The Quest would have been in vain, even
at the bitter end. So let us forgive him! For the Quest is achieved,
and now all is over. I am glad you are here with me. Here at the end
of all things, Sam.’

Chapter 4
THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN
All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged. The Captains of the
West were foundering in a gathering sea. The sun gleamed red, and
under the wings of the Nazgûl the shadows of death fell dark upon
the earth. Aragorn stood beneath his banner, silent and stern, as one
lost in thought of things long past or far away; but his eyes gleamed
like stars that shine the brighter as the night deepens. Upon the
hill-top stood Gandalf, and he was white and cold and no shadow
fell on him. The onslaught of Mordor broke like a wave on the
beleaguered hills, voices roaring like a tide amid the wreck and crash
of arms.
As if to his eyes some sudden vision had been given, Gandalf
stirred; and he turned, looking back north where the skies were pale
and clear. Then he lifted up his hands and cried in a loud voice
ringing above the din: The Eagles are coming! And many voices
answered crying: The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming! The
hosts of Mordor looked up and wondered what this sign might mean.
There came Gwaihir the Windlord, and Landroval his brother,
greatest of all the Eagles of the North, mightiest of the descendants
of old Thorondor, who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of
the Encircling Mountains when Middle-earth was young. Behind
them in long swift lines came all their vassals from the northern
mountains, speeding on a gathering wind. Straight down upon the
Nazgûl they bore, stooping suddenly out of the high airs, and the
rush of their wide wings as they passed over was like a gale.
But the Nazgûl turned and ﬂed, and vanished into Mordor’s
shadows, hearing a sudden terrible call out of the Dark Tower; and
even at that moment all the hosts of Mordor trembled, doubt clutched
their hearts, their laughter failed, their hands shook and their limbs
were loosed. The Power that drove them on and ﬁlled them with
hate and fury was wavering, its will was removed from them; and
now looking in the eyes of their enemies they saw a deadly light and
were afraid.
Then all the Captains of the West cried aloud, for their hearts
were ﬁlled with a new hope in the midst of darkness. Out from the
beleaguered hills knights of Gondor, Riders of Rohan, Dúnedain of
the North, close-serried companies, drove against their wavering foes,
piercing the press with the thrust of bitter spears. But Gandalf lifted
up his arms and called once more in a clear voice:

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

949

‘Stand, Men of the West! Stand and wait! This is the hour of doom.’
And even as he spoke the earth rocked beneath their feet. Then
rising swiftly up, far above the Towers of the Black Gate, high above
the mountains, a vast soaring darkness sprang into the sky, ﬂickering with ﬁre. The earth groaned and quaked. The Towers of the
Teeth swayed, tottered, and fell down; the mighty rampart crumbled;
the Black Gate was hurled in ruin; and from far away, now dim,
now growing, now mounting to the clouds, there came a drumming
rumble, a roar, a long echoing roll of ruinous noise.
‘The realm of Sauron is ended!’ said Gandalf. ‘The Ring-bearer
has fulﬁlled his Quest.’ And as the Captains gazed south to the Land
of Mordor, it seemed to them that, black against the pall of cloud,
there rose a huge shape of shadow, impenetrable, lightning-crowned,
ﬁlling all the sky. Enormous it reared above the world, and stretched
out towards them a vast threatening hand, terrible but impotent: for
even as it leaned over them, a great wind took it, and it was all blown
away, and passed; and then a hush fell.
The Captains bowed their heads; and when they looked up again,
behold! their enemies were ﬂying and the power of Mordor was
scattering like dust in the wind. As when death smites the swollen
brooding thing that inhabits their crawling hill and holds them all in
sway, ants will wander witless and purposeless and then feebly die,
so the creatures of Sauron, orc or troll or beast spell-enslaved, ran
hither and thither mindless; and some slew themselves, or cast themselves in pits, or ﬂed wailing back to hide in holes and dark lightless
places far from hope. But the Men of Rhûn and of Harad, Easterling
and Southron, saw the ruin of their war and the great majesty and
glory of the Captains of the West. And those that were deepest and
longest in evil servitude, hating the West, and yet were men proud
and bold, in their turn now gathered themselves for a last stand of
desperate battle. But the most part ﬂed eastward as they could; and
some cast their weapons down and sued for mercy.
Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to
Aragorn and the other lords, stood upon the hill-top and called; and
down to him came the great eagle, Gwaihir the Windlord, and stood
before him.
‘Twice you have borne me, Gwaihir my friend,’ said Gandalf.
‘Thrice shall pay for all, if you are willing. You will not ﬁnd me a
burden much greater than when you bore me from Zirakzigil, where
my old life burned away.’
‘I would bear you,’ answered Gwaihir, ‘whither you will, even
were you made of stone.’

950

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Then come, and let your brother go with us, and some other of
your folk who is most swift! For we have need of speed greater than
any wind, outmatching the wings of the Nazgûl.’
‘The North Wind blows, but we shall outﬂy it,’ said Gwaihir.
And he lifted up Gandalf and sped away south, and with him went
Landroval, and Meneldor young and swift. And they passed over
Udûn and Gorgoroth and saw all the land in ruin and tumult beneath
them, and before them Mount Doom blazing, pouring out its ﬁre.
‘I am glad that you are here with me,’ said Frodo. ‘Here at the
end of all things, Sam.’
‘Yes, I am with you, Master,’ said Sam, laying Frodo’s wounded
hand gently to his breast. ‘And you’re with me. And the journey’s
ﬁnished. But after coming all that way I don’t want to give up yet.
It’s not like me, somehow, if you understand.’
‘Maybe not, Sam,’ said Frodo; ‘but it’s like things are in the world.
Hopes fail. An end comes. We have only a little time to wait now.
We are lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.’
‘Well, Master, we could at least go further from this dangerous
place here, from this Crack of Doom, if that’s its name. Now couldn’t
we? Come, Mr. Frodo, let’s go down the path at any rate!’
‘Very well, Sam. If you wish to go, I’ll come,’ said Frodo; and
they rose and went slowly down the winding road; and even as they
passed towards the Mountain’s quaking feet, a great smoke and steam
belched from the Sammath Naur, and the side of the cone was riven
open, and a huge ﬁery vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down
the eastern mountain-side.
Frodo and Sam could go no further. Their last strength of mind
and body was swiftly ebbing. They had reached a low ashen hill piled
at the Mountain’s foot; but from it there was no more escape. It was
an island now, not long to endure, amid the torment of Orodruin.
All about it the earth gaped, and from deep rifts and pits smoke and
fumes leaped up. Behind them the Mountain was convulsed. Great
rents opened in its side. Slow rivers of ﬁre came down the long slopes
towards them. Soon they would be engulfed. A rain of hot ash was
falling.
They stood now; and Sam still holding his master’s hand caressed
it. He sighed. ‘What a tale we have been in, Mr. Frodo, haven’t we?’
he said. ‘I wish I could hear it told! Do you think they’ll say: Now
comes the story of Nine-ﬁngered Frodo and the Ring of Doom? And then
everyone will hush, like we did, when in Rivendell they told us the
tale of Beren One-hand and the Great Jewel. I wish I could hear it!
And I wonder how it will go on after our part.’
But even while he spoke so, to keep fear away until the very last,

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

951

his eyes still strayed north, north into the eye of the wind, to where
the sky far off was clear, as the cold blast, rising to a gale, drove back
the darkness and the ruin of the clouds.
And so it was that Gwaihir saw them with his keen far-seeing eyes,
as down the wild wind he came, and daring the great peril of the
skies he circled in the air: two small dark ﬁgures, forlorn, hand in
hand upon a little hill, while the world shook under them, and gasped,
and rivers of ﬁre drew near. And even as he espied them and came
swooping down, he saw them fall, worn out, or choked with fumes
and heat, or stricken down by despair at last, hiding their eyes from
death.
Side by side they lay; and down swept Gwaihir, and down came
Landroval and Meneldor the swift; and in a dream, not knowing
what fate had befallen them, the wanderers were lifted up and borne
far away out of the darkness and the ﬁre.
When Sam awoke, he found that he was lying on some soft bed,
but over him gently swayed wide beechen boughs, and through their
young leaves sunlight glimmered, green and gold. All the air was full
of a sweet mingled scent.
He remembered that smell: the fragrance of Ithilien. ‘Bless me!’
he mused. ‘How long have I been asleep?’ For the scent had borne
him back to the day when he had lit his little ﬁre under the sunny
bank; and for the moment all else between was out of waking memory.
He stretched and drew a deep breath. ‘Why, what a dream I’ve had!’
he muttered. ‘I am glad to wake!’ He sat up and then he saw that
Frodo was lying beside him, and slept peacefully, one hand behind
his head, and the other resting upon the coverlet. It was the right
hand, and the third ﬁnger was missing.
Full memory ﬂooded back, and Sam cried aloud: ‘It wasn’t a
dream! Then where are we?’
And a voice spoke softly behind him: ‘In the land of Ithilien, and
in the keeping of the King; and he awaits you.’ With that Gandalf
stood before him, robed in white, his beard now gleaming like pure
snow in the twinkling of the leafy sunlight. ‘Well, Master Samwise,
how do you feel?’ he said.
But Sam lay back, and stared with open mouth, and for a moment,
between bewilderment and great joy, he could not answer. At last he
gasped: ‘Gandalf ! I thought you were dead! But then I thought I was
dead myself. Is everything sad going to come untrue? What’s happened to the world?’
‘A great Shadow has departed,’ said Gandalf, and then he laughed,
and the sound was like music, or like water in a parched land; and

952

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

as he listened the thought came to Sam that he had not heard laughter, the pure sound of merriment, for days upon days without count.
It fell upon his ears like the echo of all the joys he had ever known.
But he himself burst into tears. Then, as a sweet rain will pass down
a wind of spring and the sun will shine out the clearer, his tears
ceased, and his laughter welled up, and laughing he sprang from his
bed.
‘How do I feel?’ he cried. ‘Well, I don’t know how to say it. I feel,
I feel’ – he waved his arms in the air – ‘I feel like spring after winter,
and sun on the leaves; and like trumpets and harps and all the songs
I have ever heard!’ He stopped and he turned towards his master.
‘But how’s Mr. Frodo?’ he said. ‘Isn’t it a shame about his poor
hand? But I hope he’s all right otherwise. He’s had a cruel time.’
‘Yes, I am all right otherwise,’ said Frodo, sitting up and laughing
in his turn. ‘I fell asleep again waiting for you, Sam, you sleepy-head.
I was awake early this morning, and now it must be nearly noon.’
‘Noon?’ said Sam, trying to calculate. ‘Noon of what day?’
‘The fourteenth of the New Year,’ said Gandalf; ‘or if you like,
the eighth day of April in the Shire-reckoning.* But in Gondor the
New Year will always now begin upon the twenty-ﬁfth of March
when Sauron fell, and when you were brought out of the ﬁre to the
King. He has tended you, and now he awaits you. You shall eat and
drink with him. When you are ready I will lead you to him.’
‘The King?’ said Sam. ‘What king, and who is he?’
‘The King of Gondor and Lord of the Western Lands,’ said
Gandalf; ‘and he has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride
soon to his crowning, but he waits for you.’
‘What shall we wear?’ said Sam; for all he could see was the old
and tattered clothes that they had journeyed in, lying folded on the
ground beside their beds.
‘The clothes that you wore on your way to Mordor,’ said Gandalf.
‘Even the orc-rags that you bore in the black land, Frodo, shall be
preserved. No silks and linens, nor any armour or heraldry could be
more honourable. But later I will ﬁnd some other clothes, perhaps.’
Then he held out his hands to them, and they saw that one shone
with light. ‘What have you got there?’ Frodo cried. ‘Can it be——?’
‘Yes, I have brought your two treasures. They were found on Sam
when you were rescued, the Lady Galadriel’s gifts: your glass, Frodo,
and your box, Sam. You will be glad to have these safe again.’
When they were washed and clad, and had eaten a light meal, the
Hobbits followed Gandalf. They stepped out of the beech-grove in
* There were thirty days in March (or Rethe) in the Shire calendar.

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

953

which they had lain, and passed on to a long green lawn, glowing in
sunshine, bordered by stately dark-leaved trees laden with scarlet
blossom. Behind them they could hear the sound of falling water,
and a stream ran down before them between ﬂowering banks, until
it came to a greenwood at the lawn’s foot and passed then on under
an archway of trees, through which they saw the shimmer of water
far away.
As they came to the opening in the wood, they were surprised to
see knights in bright mail and tall guards in silver and black standing
there, who greeted them with honour and bowed before them. And
then one blew a long trumpet, and they went on through the aisle
of trees beside the singing stream. So they came to a wide green land,
and beyond it was a broad river in a silver haze, out of which rose a
long wooded isle, and many ships lay by its shores. But on the ﬁeld
where they now stood a great host was drawn up, in ranks and
companies glittering in the sun. And as the Hobbits approached
swords were unsheathed, and spears were shaken, and horns and
trumpets sang, and men cried with many voices and in many tongues:
‘Long live the Halﬂings! Praise them with great praise!
Cuio i Pheriain anann! Aglar’ni Pheriannath!
Praise them with great praise, Frodo and Samwise!
Daur a Berhael, Conin en Annûn! Eglerio!
Praise them!
Eglerio!
A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet!
Praise them!
Cormacolindor, a laita tárienna!
Praise them! The Ring-bearers, praise them with great praise!’
And so the red blood blushing in their faces and their eyes shining
with wonder, Frodo and Sam went forward and saw that amidst the
clamorous host were set three high-seats built of green turves. Behind
the seat upon the right ﬂoated, white on green, a great horse running
free; upon the left was a banner, silver upon blue, a ship swan-prowed
faring on the sea; but behind the highest throne in the midst of all a
great standard was spread in the breeze, and there a white tree
ﬂowered upon a sable ﬁeld beneath a shining crown and seven glittering stars. On the throne sat a mail-clad man, a great sword was laid
across his knees, but he wore no helm. As they drew near he rose.
And then they knew him, changed as he was, so high and glad of
face, kingly, lord of Men, dark-haired with eyes of grey.
Frodo ran to meet him, and Sam followed close behind. ‘Well, if
this isn’t the crown of all!’ he said. ‘Strider, or I’m still asleep!’

954

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Yes, Sam, Strider,’ said Aragorn. ‘It is a long way, is it not, from
Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all,
but yours has been the darkest road.’
And then to Sam’s surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee
before them; and taking them by the hand, Frodo upon his right and
Sam upon his left, he led them to the throne, and setting them upon
it, he turned to the men and captains who stood by and spoke, so
that his voice rang over all the host, crying:
‘Praise them with great praise!’
And when the glad shout had swelled up and died away again, to
Sam’s ﬁnal and complete satisfaction and pure joy, a minstrel of
Gondor stood forth, and knelt, and begged leave to sing. And behold!
he said:
‘Lo! lords and knights and men of valour unashamed, kings and
princes, and fair people of Gondor, and Riders of Rohan, and ye
sons of Elrond, and Dúnedain of the North, and Elf and Dwarf, and
greathearts of the Shire, and all free folk of the West, now listen to
my lay. For I will sing to you of Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the
Ring of Doom.’
And when Sam heard that he laughed aloud for sheer delight, and
he stood up and cried: ‘O great glory and splendour! And all my
wishes have come true!’ And then he wept.
And all the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their
merriment and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver
and gold, and all men were hushed. And he sang to them, now in
the elven-tongue, now in the speech of the West, until their hearts,
wounded with sweet words, overﬂowed, and their joy was like swords,
and they passed in thought out to regions where pain and delight
ﬂow together and tears are the very wine of blessedness.
And at the last, as the Sun fell from the noon and the shadows of
the trees lengthened, he ended. ‘Praise them with great praise!’ he
said and knelt. And then Aragorn stood up, and all the host arose,
and they passed to pavilions made ready, to eat and drink and make
merry while the day lasted.
Frodo and Sam were led apart and brought to a tent, and there
their old raiment was taken off, but folded and set aside with honour;
and clean linen was given to them. Then Gandalf came and in his
arms, to the wonder of Frodo, he bore the sword and the elven-cloak
and the mithril-coat that had been taken from him in Mordor. For
Sam he brought a coat of gilded mail, and his elven-cloak all healed
of the soils and hurts that it had suffered; and then he laid before
them two swords.
‘I do not wish for any sword,’ said Frodo.

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

955

‘Tonight at least you should wear one,’ said Gandalf.
Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and
had been laid at his side in Cirith Ungol. ‘Sting I gave to you Sam,’
he said.
‘No, master! Mr. Bilbo gave it to you, and it goes with his silver
coat; he would not wish anyone else to wear it now.’
Frodo gave way; and Gandalf, as if he were their esquire, knelt
and girt the sword-belts about them, and then rising he set circlets
of silver upon their heads. And when they were arrayed they went
to the great feast; and they sat at the King’s table with Gandalf,
´
and King Eomer
of Rohan, and the Prince Imrahil and all the chief
captains; and there also were Gimli and Legolas.
But when, after the Standing Silence, wine was brought there came
in two esquires to serve the kings; or so they seemed to be: one was
clad in the silver and sable of the Guards of Minas Tirith, and the
other in white and green. But Sam wondered what such young boys
were doing in an army of mighty men. Then suddenly as they drew
near and he could see them plainly, he exclaimed:
‘Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn’t Pippin. Mr.
Peregrin Took I should say, and Mr. Merry! How they have grown!
Bless me! But I can see there’s more tales to tell than ours.’
‘There are indeed,’ said Pippin turning towards him. ‘And we’ll
begin telling them, as soon as this feast is ended. In the meantime
you can try Gandalf. He’s not so close as he used to be, though he
laughs now more than he talks. For the present Merry and I are busy.
We are knights of the City and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.’
At last the glad day ended; and when the Sun was gone and the
round Moon rode slowly above the mists of Anduin and ﬂickered
through the ﬂuttering leaves, Frodo and Sam sat under the whispering
trees amid the fragrance of fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into
the night with Merry and Pippin and Gandalf, and after a while
Legolas and Gimli joined them. There Frodo and Sam learned much
of all that had happened to the Company after their fellowship was
broken on the evil day at Parth Galen by Rauros Falls; and still there
was always more to ask and more to tell.
Orcs, and talking trees, and leagues of grass, and galloping riders,
and glittering caves, and white towers and golden halls, and battles,
and tall ships sailing, all these passed before Sam’s mind until he felt
bewildered. But amidst all these wonders he returned always to his
astonishment at the size of Merry and Pippin; and he made them
stand back to back with Frodo and himself. He scratched his head.
‘Can’t understand it at your age!’ he said. ‘But there it is: you’re
three inches taller than you ought to be, or I’m a dwarf.’

956

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘That you certainly are not,’ said Gimli. ‘But what did I say?
Mortals cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come
of them than of a pot of beer.’
‘Ent-draughts?’ said Sam. ‘There you go about Ents again; but
what they are beats me. Why, it will take weeks before we get all
these things sized up!’
‘Weeks indeed,’ said Pippin. ‘And then Frodo will have to be
locked up in a tower in Minas Tirith and write it all down. Otherwise
he will forget half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.’
At length Gandalf rose. ‘The hands of the King are hands of
healing, dear friends,’ he said. ‘But you went to the very brink of
death ere he recalled you, putting forth all his power, and sent you
into the sweet forgetfulness of sleep. And though you have indeed
slept long and blessedly, still it is now time to sleep again.’
‘And not only Sam and Frodo here,’ said Gimli, ‘but you too,
Pippin. I love you, if only because of the pains you have cost me,
which I shall never forget. Nor shall I forget ﬁnding you on the hill
of the last battle. But for Gimli the Dwarf you would have been lost
then. But at least I know now the look of a hobbit’s foot, though it
be all that can be seen under a heap of bodies. And when I heaved
that great carcase off you, I made sure you were dead. I could have
torn out my beard. And it is only a day yet since you were ﬁrst up
and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.’
‘And I,’ said Legolas, ‘shall walk in the woods of this fair land,
which is rest enough. In days to come, if my Elven-lord allows, some
of our folk shall remove hither; and when we come it shall be blessed,
for a while. For a while: a month, a life, a hundred years of Men.
But Anduin is near, and Anduin leads down to the Sea. To the Sea!
To the Sea, to the Sea! The white gulls are crying,
The wind is blowing, and the white foam is ﬂying.
West, west away, the round sun is falling.
Grey ship, grey ship, do you hear them calling,
The voices of my people that have gone before me?
I will leave, I will leave the woods that bore me;
For our days are ending and our years failing.
I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing.
Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling,
Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling,
In Eressëa, in Elvenhome that no man can discover,
Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever!’

966

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Stewards, bright argent like snow in the sun, bearing no charge nor
device, was raised over Gondor for the last time.
Now the Captains of the West led their host towards the City,
and folk saw them advance in line upon line, ﬂashing and glinting in
the sunrise and rippling like silver. And so they came before the
Gateway and halted a furlong from the walls. As yet no gates had
been set up again, but a barrier was laid across the entrance to the
City, and there stood men at arms in silver and black with long
swords drawn. Before the barrier stood Faramir the Steward, and
Húrin Warden of the Keys, and other captains of Gondor, and the
´
Lady Eowyn
of Rohan with Elfhelm the Marshal and many knights
of the Mark; and upon either side of the Gate was a great press of
fair people in raiment of many colours and garlands of ﬂowers.
So now there was a wide space before the walls of Minas Tirith,
and it was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the soldiers
of Gondor and of Rohan, and by the people of the City and of all
parts of the land. A hush fell upon all as out from the host stepped
the Dúnedain in silver and grey; and before them came walking slow
the Lord Aragorn. He was clad in black mail girt with silver, and he
wore a long mantle of pure white clasped at the throat with a great
jewel of green that shone from afar; but his head was bare save for
a star upon his forehead bound by a slender ﬁllet of silver. With him
´
were Eomer
of Rohan, and the Prince Imrahil, and Gandalf robed
all in white, and four small ﬁgures that many men marvelled to see.
‘Nay, cousin! they are not boys,’ said Ioreth to her kinswoman
from Imloth Melui, who stood beside her. ‘Those are Periain, out of
the far country of the Halﬂings, where they are princes of great fame,
it is said. I should know, for I had one to tend in the Houses. They
are small, but they are valiant. Why, cousin, one of them went with
only his esquire into the Black Country and fought with the Dark
Lord all by himself, and set ﬁre to his Tower, if you can believe it.
At least that is the tale in the City. That will be the one that walks
with our Elfstone. They are dear friends, I hear. Now he is a marvel,
the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech, mind you, but he has
a golden heart, as the saying is; and he has the healing hands. ‘‘The
hands of the king are the hands of a healer’’, I said; and that was
how it was all discovered. And Mithrandir, he said to me: ‘‘Ioreth,
men will long remember your words’’, and——’
But Ioreth was not permitted to continue the instruction of her
kinswoman from the country, for a single trumpet rang, and a dead
silence followed. Then forth from the Gate went Faramir with Húrin
of the Keys, and no others, save that behind them walked four men
in the high helms and armour of the Citadel, and they bore a great
casket of black lebethron bound with silver.

968

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

would have the Ring-bearer bring the crown to me, and let Mithrandir
set it upon my head, if he will; for he has been the mover of all that
has been accomplished, and this is his victory.’
Then Frodo came forward and took the crown from Faramir and
bore it to Gandalf; and Aragorn knelt, and Gandalf set the White
Crown upon his head, and said:
‘Now come the days of the King, and may they be blessed while
the thrones of the Valar endure!’
But when Aragorn arose all that beheld him gazed in silence, for
it seemed to them that he was revealed to them now for the ﬁrst
time. Tall as the sea-kings of old, he stood above all that were near;
ancient of days he seemed and yet in the ﬂower of manhood; and
wisdom sat upon his brow, and strength and healing were in his
hands, and a light was about him. And then Faramir cried:
‘Behold the King!’
And in that moment all the trumpets were blown, and the King
Elessar went forth and came to the barrier, and Húrin of the Keys
thrust it back; and amid the music of harp and of viol and of ﬂute
and the singing of clear voices the King passed through the ﬂowerladen streets, and came to the Citadel, and entered in; and the banner
of the Tree and the Stars was unfurled upon the topmost tower, and
the reign of King Elessar began, of which many songs have told.
In his time the City was made more fair than it had ever been,
even in the days of its ﬁrst glory; and it was ﬁlled with trees and with
fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithril and steel, and its
streets were paved with white marble; and the Folk of the Mountain
laboured in it, and the Folk of the Wood rejoiced to come there; and
all was healed and made good, and the houses were ﬁlled with men
and women and the laughter of children, and no window was blind
nor any courtyard empty; and after the ending of the Third Age of
the world into the new age it preserved the memory and the glory of
the years that were gone.
In the days that followed his crowning the King sat on his throne in
the Hall of the Kings and pronounced his judgements. And embassies
came from many lands and peoples, from the East and the South,
and from the borders of Mirkwood, and from Dunland in the west.
And the King pardoned the Easterlings that had given themselves
up, and sent them away free, and he made peace with the peoples
of Harad; and the slaves of Mordor he released and gave to them all
the lands about Lake Núrnen to be their own. And there were brought
before him many to receive his praise and reward for their valour;
and last the captain of the Guard brought to him Beregond to be
judged.

970

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

went the sons of Elrond. All the road was lined with people to do
them honour and praise them, from the Gate of the City to the walls
of the Pelennor. Then all others that dwelt afar went back to their
homes rejoicing; but in the City there was labour of many willing
hands to rebuild and renew and to remove all the scars of war and
the memory of the darkness.
The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and
Gimli; for Aragorn was loth for the fellowship to be dissolved. ‘At
last all such things must end,’ he said, ‘but I would have you wait a
little while longer: for the end of the deeds that you have shared in
has not yet come. A day draws near that I have looked for in all the
years of my manhood, and when it comes I would have my friends
beside me.’ But of that day he would say no more.
In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair
house with Gandalf, and they went to and fro as they wished. And
Frodo said to Gandalf: ‘Do you know what this day is that Aragorn
speaks of ? For we are happy here, and I don’t wish to go; but the
days are running away, and Bilbo is waiting; and the Shire is my
home.’
‘As for Bilbo,’ said Gandalf, ‘he is waiting for the same day, and
he knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is
now only May and high summer is not yet in; and though all things
may seem changed, as if an age of the world had gone by, yet to the
trees and the grass it is less than a year since you set out.’
‘Pippin,’ said Frodo, ‘didn’t you say that Gandalf was less close
than of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is
recovering.’
And Gandalf said: ‘Many folk like to know beforehand what is to
be set on the table; but those who have laboured to prepare the feast
like to keep their secret; for wonder makes the words of praise louder.
And Aragorn himself waits for a sign.’
There came a day when Gandalf could not be found, and the
Companions wondered what was going forward. But Gandalf took
Aragorn out from the City by night, and he brought him to the
southern feet of Mount Mindolluin; and there they found a path
made in ages past that few now dared to tread. For it led up on to
the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had been wont
to go. And they went up by steep ways, until they came to a high
ﬁeld below the snows that clad the lofty peaks, and it looked down
over the precipice that stood behind the City. And standing there
they surveyed the lands, for the morning was come; and they saw
the towers of the City far below them like white pencils touched by
the sunlight, and all the Vale of Anduin was like a garden, and the

T H E S T E WA R D A N D T H E K I N G

971

Mountains of Shadow were veiled in a golden mist. Upon the one
side their sight reached to the grey Emyn Muil, and the glint of
Rauros was like a star twinkling far off; and upon the other side they
saw the River like a ribbon laid down to Pelargir, and beyond that
was a light on the hem of the sky that spoke of the Sea.
And Gandalf said: ‘This is your realm, and the heart of the greater
realm that shall be. The Third Age of the world is ended, and the
new age is begun; and it is your task to order its beginning and to
preserve what may be preserved. For though much has been saved,
much must now pass away; and the power of the Three Rings also
is ended. And all the lands that you see, and those that lie round
about them, shall be dwellings of Men. For the time comes of the
Dominion of Men, and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart.’
‘I know it well, dear friend,’ said Aragorn; ‘but I would still have
your counsel.’
‘Not for long now,’ said Gandalf. ‘The Third Age was my age. I
was the Enemy of Sauron; and my work is ﬁnished. I shall go soon.
The burden must lie now upon you and your kindred.’
‘But I shall die,’ said Aragorn. ‘For I am a mortal man, and though
being what I am and of the race of the West unmingled, I shall have
life far longer than other men, yet that is but a little while; and when
those who are now in the wombs of women are born and have grown
old, I too shall grow old. And who then shall govern Gondor and
those who look to this City as to their queen, if my desire be not
granted? The Tree in the Court of the Fountain is still withered and
barren. When shall I see a sign that it will ever be otherwise?’
‘Turn your face from the green world, and look where all seems
barren and cold!’ said Gandalf.
Then Aragorn turned, and there was a stony slope behind him
running down from the skirts of the snow; and as he looked he was
aware that alone there in the waste a growing thing stood. And he
climbed to it, and saw that out of the very edge of the snow there
sprang a sapling tree no more than three foot high. Already it had
put forth young leaves long and shapely, dark above and silver beneath, and upon its slender crown it bore one small cluster of ﬂowers
whose white petals shone like the sunlit snow.
Then Aragorn cried: ‘Yé! utúvienyes! I have found it! Lo! here is
a scion of the Eldest of Trees! But how comes it here? For it is not
itself yet seven years old.’
And Gandalf coming looked at it, and said: ‘Verily this is a sapling
of the line of Nimloth the fair; and that was a seedling of Galathilion,
and that a fruit of Telperion of many names, Eldest of Trees. Who
shall say how it comes here in the appointed hour? But this is an
ancient hallow, and ere the kings failed or the Tree withered in the

MANY PARTINGS

975

you may pass into the West, until all your wounds and weariness are
healed. But wear this now in memory of Elfstone and Evenstar with
whom your life has been woven!’
And she took a white gem like a star that lay upon her breast
hanging upon a silver chain, and she set the chain about Frodo’s
neck. ‘When the memory of the fear and the darkness troubles you,’
she said, ‘this will bring you aid.’
´
In three days, as the King had said, Eomer
of Rohan came riding
to the City, and with him came an éored of the fairest knights of the
Mark. He was welcomed; and when they sat all at table in Merethrond, the Great Hall of Feasts, he beheld the beauty of the ladies
that he saw and was ﬁlled with great wonder. And before he went to
his rest he sent for Gimli the Dwarf, and he said to him: ‘Gimli
Glóin’s son, have you your axe ready?’
‘Nay, lord,’ said Gimli, ‘but I can speedily fetch it, if there be
need.’
´
‘You shall judge,’ said Eomer.
‘For there are certain rash words
concerning the Lady in the Golden Wood that lie still between us.
And now I have seen her with my eyes.’
‘Well, lord,’ said Gimli, ‘and what say you now?’
´
‘Alas!’ said Eomer.
‘I will not say that she is the fairest lady that
lives.’
‘Then I must go for my axe,’ said Gimli.
´
‘But ﬁrst I will plead this excuse,’ said Eomer.
‘Had I seen her in
other company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now
I will put Queen Arwen Evenstar ﬁrst, and I am ready to do battle
on my own part with any who deny me. Shall I call for my sword?’
Then Gimli bowed low. ‘Nay, you are excused for my part, lord,’
he said. ‘You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the
Morning. And my heart forebodes that soon it will pass away for
ever.’
At last the day of departure came, and a great and fair company
made ready to ride north from the City. Then the kings of Gondor
and Rohan went to the Hallows and they came to the tombs in Rath
Dı́nen, and they bore away King Théoden upon a golden bier, and
passed through the City in silence. Then they laid the bier upon a
great wain with Riders of Rohan all about it and his banner borne
before; and Merry being Théoden’s esquire rode upon the wain and
kept the arms of the king.
For the other Companions steeds were furnished according to
their stature; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn’s side, and
Gandalf rode upon Shadowfax, and Pippin rode with the knights of

MANY PARTINGS

979

Tower of Orthanc rose still, tall and impregnable, and its black rock
was mirrored in the pool.
For a while the travellers sat where once the old gates of Isengard
had stood, and there were now two tall trees like sentinels at the
beginning of a green-bordered path that ran towards Orthanc; and
they looked in wonder at the work that had been done, but no living
thing could they see far or near. But presently they heard a voice
calling hoom-hom, hoom-hom; and there came Treebeard striding
down the path to greet them with Quickbeam at his side.
‘Welcome to the Treegarth of Orthanc!’ he said. ‘I knew that you
were coming, but I was at work up the valley; there is much still to
be done. But you have not been idle either away in the south and
the east, I hear; and all that I hear is good, very good.’ Then Treebeard praised all their deeds, of which he seemed to have full knowledge; and at last he stopped and looked long at Gandalf.
‘Well, come now!’ he said. ‘You have proved mightiest, and all
your labours have gone well. Where now would you be going? And
why do you come here?’
‘To see how your work goes, my friend,’ said Gandalf, ‘and to
thank you for your aid in all that has been achieved.’
‘Hoom, well, that is fair enough,’ said Treebeard; ‘for to be sure
Ents have played their part. And not only in dealing with that, hoom,
that accursed tree-slayer that dwelt here. For there was a great inrush of those, burárum, those evileyed-blackhanded-bowlegged-ﬂinthearted-clawﬁngered-foulbellied-bloodthirsty, morimaite-sincahonda,
hoom, well, since you are hasty folk and their full name is as long as
years of torment, those vermin of orcs; and they came over the River
and down from the North and all round the wood of Laurelindórenan,
which they could not get into, thanks to the Great ones who are
here.’ He bowed to the Lord and Lady of Lórien.
‘And these same foul creatures were more than surprised to meet
us out on the Wold, for they had not heard of us before; though that
might be said also of better folk. And not many will remember us,
for not many escaped us alive, and the River had most of those. But
it was well for you, for if they had not met us, then the king of the
grassland would not have ridden far, and if he had there would have
been no home to return to.’
‘We know it well,’ said Aragorn, ‘and never shall it be forgotten
in Minas Tirith or in Edoras.’
‘Never is too long a word even for me,’ said Treebeard. ‘Not while
your kingdoms last, you mean; but they will have to last long indeed
to seem long to Ents.’
‘The New Age begins,’ said Gandalf, ‘and in this age it may well
prove that the kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangorn my friend.

980

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

But now come tell me: what of the task that I set you? How is
Saruman? Is he not weary of Orthanc yet? For I do not suppose that
he will think you have improved the view from his windows.’
Treebeard gave Gandalf a long look, almost a cunning look, Merry
thought. ‘Ah!’ he said. ‘I thought you would come to that. Weary of
Orthanc? Very weary at last; but not so weary of his tower as he was
weary of my voice. Hoom! I gave him some long tales, or at least
what might be thought long in your speech.’
‘Then why did he stay to listen? Did you go into Orthanc?’ asked
Gandalf.
‘Hoom, no, not into Orthanc!’ said Treebeard. ‘But he came to
his window and listened, because he could not get news in any other
way, and though he hated the news, he was greedy to have it; and I
saw that he heard it all. But I added a great many things to the news
that it was good for him to think of. He grew very weary. He always
was hasty. That was his ruin.’
‘I observe, my good Fangorn,’ said Gandalf, ‘that with great care
you say dwelt, was, grew. What about is? Is he dead?’
‘No, not dead, so far as I know,’ said Treebeard. ‘But he is gone.
Yes, he is gone seven days. I let him go. There was little left of him
when he crawled out, and as for that worm-creature of his, he was
like a pale shadow. Now do not tell me, Gandalf, that I promised to
keep him safe; for I know it. But things have changed since then.
And I kept him until he was safe, safe from doing any more harm.
You should know that above all I hate the caging of live things, and
I will not keep even such creatures as these caged beyond great need.
A snake without fangs may crawl where he will.’
‘You may be right,’ said Gandalf; ‘but this snake had still one
tooth left, I think. He had the poison of his voice, and I guess that
he persuaded you, even you Treebeard, knowing the soft spot in your
heart. Well, he is gone, and there is no more to be said. But the
Tower of Orthanc now goes back to the King, to whom it belongs.
Though maybe he will not need it.’
‘That will be seen later,’ said Aragorn. ‘But I will give to Ents all
this valley to do with as they will, so long as they keep a watch upon
Orthanc and see that none enter it without my leave.’
‘It is locked,’ said Treebeard. ‘I made Saruman lock it and give
me the keys. Quickbeam has them.’
Quickbeam bowed like a tree bending in the wind and handed to
Aragorn two great black keys of intricate shape, joined by a ring of
steel. ‘Now I thank you once more,’ said Aragorn, ‘and I bid you
farewell. May your forest grow again in peace. When this valley is
ﬁlled there is room and to spare west of the mountains, where once
you walked long ago.’

MANY PARTINGS

983

again into the open country at sundown they overtook an old man
leaning on a staff, and he was clothed in rags of grey or dirty white,
and at his heels went another beggar, slouching and whining.
‘Well Saruman!’ said Gandalf. ‘Where are you going?’
‘What is that to you?’ he answered. ‘Will you still order my goings,
and are you not content with my ruin?’
‘You know the answers,’ said Gandalf: ‘no and no. But in any
case the time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has
taken on the burden. If you had waited at Orthanc, you would have
seen him, and he would have shown you wisdom and mercy.’
‘Then all the more reason to have left sooner,’ said Saruman; ‘for
I desire neither of him. Indeed if you wish for an answer to your ﬁrst
question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.’
‘Then once more you are going the wrong way,’ said Gandalf,
‘and I see no hope in your journey. But will you scorn our help? For
we offer it to you.’
‘To me?’ said Saruman. ‘Nay, pray do not smile at me! I prefer
your frowns. And as for the Lady here, I do not trust her: she always
hated me, and schemed for your part. I do not doubt that she has
brought you this way to have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty.
Had I been warned of your pursuit, I would have denied you the
pleasure.’
‘Saruman,’ said Galadriel, ‘we have other errands and other cares
that seem to us more urgent than hunting for you. Say rather that
you are overtaken by good fortune; for now you have a last chance.’
‘If it be truly the last, I am glad,’ said Saruman; ‘for I shall be
spared the trouble of refusing it again. All my hopes are ruined, but
I would not share yours. If you have any.’
For a moment his eyes kindled. ‘Go!’ he said. ‘I did not spend
long study on these matters for naught. You have doomed yourselves,
and you know it. And it will afford me some comfort as I wander to
think that you pulled down your own house when you destroyed
mine. And now, what ship will bear you back across so wide a sea?’
he mocked. ‘It will be a grey ship, and full of ghosts.’ He laughed,
but his voice was cracked and hideous.
‘Get up, you idiot!’ he shouted to the other beggar, who had sat
down on the ground; and he struck him with his staff. ‘Turn about!
If these ﬁne folk are going our way, then we will take another. Get
on, or I’ll give you no crust for your supper!’
The beggar turned and slouched past whimpering: ‘Poor old
Grı́ma! Poor old Grı́ma! Always beaten and cursed. How I hate him!
I wish I could leave him!’
‘Then leave him!’ said Gandalf.
But Wormtongue only shot a glance of his bleared eyes full of

984

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

terror at Gandalf, and then shufﬂed quickly past behind Saruman.
As the wretched pair passed by the company they came to the hobbits,
and Saruman stopped and stared at them; but they looked at him
with pity.
‘So you have come to gloat too, have you, my urchins?’ he said.
‘You don’t care what a beggar lacks, do you? For you have all you
want, food and ﬁne clothes, and the best weed for your pipes. Oh
yes, I know! I know where it comes from. You would not give a
pipeful to a beggar, would you?’
‘I would, if I had any,’ said Frodo.
‘You can have what I have got left,’ said Merry, ‘if you will wait
a moment.’ He got down and searched in the bag at his saddle. Then
he handed to Saruman a leather pouch. ‘Take what there is,’ he said.
‘You are welcome to it; it came from the ﬂotsam of Isengard.’
‘Mine, mine, yes and dearly bought!’ cried Saruman, clutching at
the pouch. ‘This is only a repayment in token; for you took more,
I’ll be bound. Still, a beggar must be grateful, if a thief returns him
even a morsel of his own. Well, it will serve you right when you come
home, if you ﬁnd things less good in the Southfarthing than you
would like. Long may your land be short of leaf !’
‘Thank you!’ said Merry. ‘In that case I will have my pouch back,
which is not yours and has journeyed far with me. Wrap the weed
in a rag of your own.’
‘One thief deserves another,’ said Saruman, and turned his back
on Merry, and kicked Wormtongue, and went away towards the
wood.
‘Well, I like that!’ said Pippin. ‘Thief indeed! What of our claim
for waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?’
‘Ah!’ said Sam. ‘And bought he said. How, I wonder? And I didn’t
like the sound of what he said about the Southfarthing. It’s time we
got back.’
‘I’m sure it is,’ said Frodo. ‘But we can’t go any quicker, if we are
to see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell ﬁrst, whatever happens.’
‘Yes, I think you had better do that,’ said Gandalf. ‘But alas for
Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered
altogether. All the same, I am not sure that Treebeard is right: I
fancy he could do some mischief still in a small mean way.’
Next day they went on into northern Dunland, where no men
now dwelt, though it was a green and pleasant country. September
came in with golden days and silver nights, and they rode at ease
until they reached the Swanﬂeet river, and found the old ford, east of
the falls where it went down suddenly into the lowlands. Far to the west
in a haze lay the meres and eyots through which it wound its way to
the Greyﬂood: there countless swans housed in a land of reeds.

MANY PARTINGS

985

So they passed into Eregion, and at last a fair morning dawned,
shimmering above gleaming mists; and looking from their camp
on a low hill the travellers saw away in the east the Sun catching
three peaks that thrust up into the sky through ﬂoating clouds:
Caradhras, Celebdil, and Fanuidhol. They were near to the Gates of
Moria.
Here now for seven days they tarried, for the time was at hand
for another parting which they were loth to make. Soon Celeborn
and Galadriel and their folk would turn eastward, and so pass by the
Redhorn Gate and down the Dimrill Stair to the Silverlode and to
their own country. They had journeyed thus far by the west-ways,
for they had much to speak of with Elrond and with Gandalf, and
here they lingered still in converse with their friends. Often long after
the hobbits were wrapped in sleep they would sit together under the
stars, recalling the ages that were gone and all their joys and labours
in the world, or holding council, concerning the days to come. If any
wanderer had chanced to pass, little would he have seen or heard,
and it would have seemed to him only that he saw grey ﬁgures, carved
in stone, memorials of forgotten things now lost in unpeopled lands.
For they did not move or speak with mouth, looking from mind to
mind; and only their shining eyes stirred and kindled as their thoughts
went to and fro.
But at length all was said, and they parted again for a while, until
it was time for the Three Rings to pass away. Quickly fading into the
stones and the shadows the grey-cloaked people of Lórien rode
towards the mountains; and those who were going to Rivendell sat
on the hill and watched, until there came out of the gathering mist
a ﬂash; and then they saw no more. Frodo knew that Galadriel had
held aloft her ring in token of farewell.
Sam turned away and sighed: ‘I wish I was going back to Lórien!’
At last one evening they came over the high moors, suddenly as
to travellers it always seemed, to the brink of the deep valley of
Rivendell and saw far below the lamps shining in Elrond’s house.
And they went down and crossed the bridge and came to the doors,
and all the house was ﬁlled with light and song for joy at Elrond’s
homecoming.
First of all, before they had eaten or washed or even shed their
cloaks, the hobbits went in search of Bilbo. They found him all alone
in his little room. It was littered with papers and pens and pencils;
but Bilbo was sitting in a chair before a small bright ﬁre. He looked
very old, but peaceful, and sleepy.
He opened his eyes and looked up as they came in. ‘Hullo, hullo!’
he said. ‘So you’ve come back? And tomorrow’s my birthday,
too. How clever of you! Do you know, I shall be one hundred and

986

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

twenty-nine? And in one year more, if I am spared, I shall equal the
Old Took. I should like to beat him; but we shall see.’
After the celebration of Bilbo’s birthday the four hobbits stayed
in Rivendell for some days, and they sat much with their old friend,
who spent most of his time now in his room, except at meals. For
these he was still very punctual as a rule, and he seldom failed to
wake up in time for them. Sitting round the ﬁre they told him in
turn all that they could remember of their journeys and adventures.
At ﬁrst he pretended to take some notes; but he often fell asleep;
and when he woke he would say: ‘How splendid! How wonderful!
But where were we?’ Then they went on with the story from the
point where he had begun to nod.
The only part that seemed really to rouse him and hold his attention was the account of the crowning and marriage of Aragorn. ‘I
was invited to the wedding, of course,’ he said. ‘And I have waited
for it long enough. But somehow, when it came to it, I found I had
so much to do here; and packing is such a bother.’
When nearly a fortnight had passed Frodo looked out of his
window and saw that there had been a frost in the night, and the
cobwebs were like white nets. Then suddenly he knew that he must
go, and say good-bye to Bilbo. The weather was still calm and fair,
after one of the most lovely summers that people could remember;
but October had come, and it must break soon and begin to rain
and blow again. And there was still a very long way to go. Yet it was
not really the thought of the weather that stirred him. He had a
feeling that it was time he went back to the Shire. Sam shared it.
Only the night before he had said:
‘Well, Mr. Frodo, we’ve been far and seen a deal, and yet I don’t
think we’ve found a better place than this. There’s something of
everything here, if you understand me: the Shire and the Golden
Wood and Gondor and kings’ houses and inns and meadows and
mountains all mixed. And yet, somehow, I feel we ought to be going
soon. I’m worried about my gaffer, to tell you the truth.’
‘Yes, something of everything, Sam, except the Sea,’ Frodo had
answered; and he repeated it now to himself: ‘Except the Sea.’
That day Frodo spoke to Elrond, and it was agreed that they
should leave the next morning. To their delight Gandalf said: ‘I think
I shall come too. At least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.’
In the evening they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. ‘Well, if you
must go, you must,’ he said. ‘I am sorry. I shall miss you. It is nice
just to know that you are about the place. But I am getting very
sleepy.’ Then he gave Frodo his mithril-coat and Sting, forgetting

MANY PARTINGS

987

that he had already done so; and he gave him also three books of
lore that he had made at various times, written in his spidery hand,
and labelled on their red backs: Translations from the Elvish, by B.B.
To Sam he gave a little bag of gold. ‘Almost the last drop of the
Smaug vintage,’ he said. ‘May come in useful, if you think of getting
married, Sam.’ Sam blushed.
‘I have nothing much to give to you young fellows,’ he said to
Merry and Pippin, ‘except good advice.’ And when he had given
them a fair sample of this, he added a last item in Shire-fashion:
‘Don’t let your heads get too big for your hats! But if you don’t ﬁnish
growing up soon, you are going to ﬁnd hats and clothes expensive.’
‘But if you want to beat the Old Took,’ said Pippin, ‘I don’t see
why we shouldn’t try and beat the Bullroarer.’
Bilbo laughed, and he produced out of a pocket two beautiful
pipes with pearl mouth-pieces and bound with ﬁne-wrought silver.
‘Think of me when you smoke them!’ he said. ‘The Elves made them
for me, but I don’t smoke now.’ And then suddenly he nodded and
went to sleep for a little; and when he woke up again he said: ‘Now
where were we? Yes, of course, giving presents. Which reminds me:
what’s become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?’
‘I have lost it, Bilbo dear,’ said Frodo. ‘I got rid of it, you know.’
‘What a pity!’ said Bilbo. ‘I should have liked to see it again. But
no, how silly of me! That’s what you went for, wasn’t it: to get rid
of it? But it is all so confusing, for such a lot of other things seem to
have got mixed up with it: Aragorn’s affairs, and the White Council,
and Gondor, and the Horsemen, and Southrons, and oliphaunts –
did you really see one, Sam? – and caves and towers and golden
trees, and goodness knows what besides.
‘I evidently came back by much too straight a road from my trip.
I think Gandalf might have shown me round a bit. But then the
auction would have been over before I got back, and I should have
had even more trouble than I did. Anyway it’s too late now; and
really I think it’s much more comfortable to sit here and hear about
it all. The ﬁre’s very cosy here, and the food’s very good, and there
are Elves when you want them. What more could one want?
The Road goes ever on and on
Out from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
Let others follow it who can!
Let them a journey new begin,
But I at last with weary feet
Will turn towards the lighted inn,
My evening-rest and sleep to meet.’

988

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

And as Bilbo murmured the last words his head dropped on his
chest and he slept soundly.
The evening deepened in the room, and the ﬁrelight burned
brighter; and they looked at Bilbo as he slept and saw that his face
was smiling. For some time they sat in silence; and then Sam looking
round at the room and the shadows ﬂickering on the walls, said softly:
‘I don’t think, Mr. Frodo, that he’s done much writing while we’ve
been away. He won’t ever write our story now.’
At that Bilbo opened an eye, almost as if he had heard. Then he
roused himself. ‘You see, I am getting so sleepy,’ he said. ‘And when
I have time to write, I only really like writing poetry. I wonder, Frodo
my dear fellow, if you would very much mind tidying things up a bit
before you go? Collect all my notes and papers, and my diary too,
and take them with you, if you will. You see, I haven’t much time
for the selection and the arrangement and all that. Get Sam to help,
and when you’ve knocked things into shape, come back, and I’ll run
over it. I won’t be too critical.’
‘Of course I’ll do it!’ said Frodo. ‘And of course I’ll come back
soon: it won’t be dangerous any more. There is a real king now, and
he will soon put the roads in order.’
‘Thank you, my dear fellow!’ said Bilbo. ‘That really is a very great
relief to my mind.’ And with that he fell asleep again.
The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave of Bilbo in his
room, for it was cold out of doors; and then they said farewell to
Elrond and all his household.
As Frodo stood upon the threshold, Elrond wished him a fair
journey, and blessed him, and he said:
‘I think, Frodo, that maybe you will not need to come back, unless
you come very soon. For about this time of the year, when the leaves
are gold before they fall, look for Bilbo in the woods of the Shire. I
shall be with him.’
These words no one else heard, and Frodo kept them to himself.

Chapter 7
H O M E WA R D B O U N D
At last the hobbits had their faces turned towards home. They were
eager now to see the Shire again; but at ﬁrst they rode only slowly,
for Frodo had been ill at ease. When they came to the Ford of
Bruinen, he had halted, and seemed loth to ride into the stream; and
they noted that for a while his eyes appeared not to see them or
things about him. All that day he was silent. It was the sixth of
October.
‘Are you in pain, Frodo?’ said Gandalf quietly as he rode by
Frodo’s side.
‘Well, yes I am,’ said Frodo. ‘It is my shoulder. The wound aches,
and the memory of darkness is heavy on me. It was a year ago today.’
‘Alas! there are some wounds that cannot be wholly cured,’ said
Gandalf.
‘I fear it may be so with mine,’ said Frodo. ‘There is no real going
back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same;
for I shall not be the same. I am wounded with knife, sting, and
tooth, and a long burden. Where shall I ﬁnd rest?’
Gandalf did not answer.
By the end of the next day the pain and unease had passed, and
Frodo was merry again, as merry as if he did not remember the
blackness of the day before. After that the journey went well, and
the days went quickly by; for they rode at leisure, and often they
lingered in the fair woodlands where the leaves were red and yellow
in the autumn sun. At length they came to Weathertop; and it was
then drawing towards evening and the shadow of the hill lay dark on
the road. Then Frodo begged them to hasten, and he would not look
towards the hill, but rode through its shadow with head bowed and
cloak drawn close about him. That night the weather changed, and a
wind came from the West laden with rain, and it blew loud and chill,
and the yellow leaves whirled like birds in the air. When they came
to the Chetwood already the boughs were almost bare, and a great
curtain of rain veiled Bree-hill from their sight.
So it was that near the end of a wild and wet evening in the last
days of October the ﬁve travellers rode up the climbing road and
came to the South-gate of Bree. It was locked fast; and the rain blew
in their faces, and in the darkening sky low clouds went hurrying by,
and their hearts sank a little, for they had expected more welcome.

990

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

When they had called many times, at last the Gate-keeper came
out, and they saw that he carried a great cudgel. He looked at them
with fear and suspicion; but when he saw that Gandalf was there,
and that his companions were hobbits, in spite of their strange gear,
then he brightened and wished them welcome.
‘Come in!’ he said, unlocking the gate. ‘We won’t stay for news
out here in the cold and the wet, a rufﬁanly evening. But old Barley
will no doubt give you a welcome at The Pony, and there you’ll hear
all there is to hear.’
‘And there you’ll hear later all that we say, and more,’ laughed
Gandalf. ‘How is Harry?’
The Gate-keeper scowled. ‘Gone,’ he said. ‘But you’d best ask
Barliman. Good evening!’
‘Good evening to you!’ they said, and passed through; and then
they noticed that behind the hedge at the road-side a long low hut
had been built, and a number of men had come out and were staring
at them over the fence. When they came to Bill Ferny’s house they
saw that the hedge there was tattered and unkempt, and the windows
were all boarded up.
‘Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?’ said Pippin.
‘I’m not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin,’ said Sam. ‘But I’d like to know
what became of that poor pony. He’s been on my mind many a time,
and the wolves howling and all.’
At last they came to The Prancing Pony, and that at least looked
outwardly unchanged; and there were lights behind the red curtains
in the lower windows. They rang the bell, and Nob came to the door,
and opened it a crack and peeped through; and when he saw them
standing under the lamp he gave a cry of surprise.
‘Mr. Butterbur! Master!’ he shouted. ‘They’ve come back!’
‘Oh have they? I’ll learn them,’ came Butterbur’s voice, and out
he came with a rush, and he had a club in his hand. But when he
saw who they were he stopped short, and the black scowl on his face
changed to wonder and delight.
‘Nob, you woolly-pated ninny!’ he cried. ‘Can’t you give old
friends their names? You shouldn’t go scaring me like that, with times
as they are. Well, well! And where have you come from? I never
expected to see any of you folk again, and that’s a fact: going off into
the Wild with that Strider, and all those Black Men about. But I’m
right glad to see you, and none more than Gandalf. Come in! Come
in! The same rooms as before? They’re free. Indeed most rooms are
empty these days, as I’ll not hide from you, for you’ll ﬁnd it out soon
enough. And I’ll see what can be done about supper, as soon as may
be; but I’m short-handed at present. Hey, Nob you slowcoach! Tell

H O M E WA R D B O U N D

991

Bob! Ah, but there I’m forgetting, Bob’s gone: goes home to his folk
at nightfall now. Well, take the guests’ ponies to the stables, Nob!
And you’ll be taking your horse to his stable yourself, Gandalf, I
don’t doubt. A ﬁne beast, as I said when I ﬁrst set eyes on him. Well,
come in! Make yourselves at home!’
Mr. Butterbur had at any rate not changed his manner of talking,
and still seemed to live in his old breathless bustle. And yet there
was hardly anybody about, and all was quiet; from the Common
Room there came a low murmur of no more than two or three voices.
And seen closer in the light of two candles that he lit and carried
before them the landlord’s face looked rather wrinkled and careworn.
He led them down the passage to the parlour that they had used
on that strange night more than a year ago; and they followed him,
a little disquieted, for it seemed plain to them that old Barliman was
putting a brave face on some trouble. Things were not what they had
been. But they said nothing, and waited.
As they expected Mr. Butterbur came to the parlour after supper
to see if all had been to their liking. As indeed it had: no change for
the worse had yet come upon the beer or the victuals at The Pony,
at any rate. ‘Now I won’t make so bold as to suggest you should
come to the Common Room tonight,’ said Butterbur. ‘You’ll be
tired; and there isn’t many folk there this evening, anyway. But if
you could spare me half an hour before you go to your beds, I would
dearly like to have some talk with you, quiet-like by ourselves.’
‘That is just what we should like, too,’ said Gandalf. ‘We are not
tired. We have been taking things easy. We were wet, cold and
hungry, but all that you have cured. Come, sit down! And if you
have any pipe-weed, we’ll bless you.’
‘Well, if you’d called for anything else, I’d have been happier,’
said Butterbur. ‘That’s just a thing that we’re short of, seeing how
we’ve only got what we grow ourselves, and that’s not enough.
There’s none to be had from the Shire these days. But I’ll do what
I can.’
When he came back he brought them enough to last them for a
day or two, a wad of uncut leaf. ‘Southlinch,’ he said, ‘and the best
we have; but not the match of Southfarthing, as I’ve always said,
though I’m all for Bree in most matters, begging your pardon.’
They put him in a large chair by the wood-ﬁre, and Gandalf sat
on the other side of the hearth, and the hobbits in low chairs between
them; and then they talked for many times half an hour, and
exchanged all such news as Mr. Butterbur wished to hear or give.
Most of the things which they had to tell were a mere wonder and
bewilderment to their host, and far beyond his vision; and they
brought forth few comments other than: ‘You don’t say,’ often

992

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

repeated in deﬁance of the evidence of Mr. Butterbur’s own ears.
‘You don’t say, Mr. Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill? I’m getting so
mixed up. You don’t say, Master Gandalf ! Well I never! Who’d have
thought it in our times!’
But he did say much on his own account. Things were far from
well, he would say. Business was not even fair, it was downright bad.
‘No one comes nigh Bree now from Outside,’ he said. ‘And the inside
folks, they stay at home mostly and keep their doors barred. It all
comes of those newcomers and gangrels that began coming up the
Greenway last year, as you may remember; but more came later.
Some were just poor bodies running away from trouble; but most
were bad men, full o’ thievery and mischief. And there was trouble
right here in Bree, bad trouble. Why, we had a real set-to, and there
were some folk killed, killed dead! If you’ll believe me.’
‘I will indeed,’ said Gandalf. ‘How many?’
‘Three and two,’ said Butterbur, referring to the big folk and the
little. ‘There was poor Mat Heathertoes, and Rowlie Appledore, and
little Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill; and Willie Banks from upaway, and one of the Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and
they’re missed. And Harry Goatleaf that used to be on the West-gate,
and that Bill Ferny, they came in on the strangers’ side, and they’ve
gone off with them; and it’s my belief they let them in. On the night
of the ﬁght, I mean. And that was after we showed them the gates
and pushed them out: before the year’s end, that was; and the ﬁght
was early in the New Year, after the heavy snow we had.
‘And now they’re gone for robbers and live outside, hiding in the
woods beyond Archet, and out in the wilds north-away. It’s like a
bit of the bad old times tales tell of, I say. It isn’t safe on the road
and nobody goes far, and folk lock up early. We have to keep watchers
all round the fence and put a lot of men on the gates at nights.’
‘Well, no one troubled us,’ said Pippin, ‘and we came along slowly,
and kept no watch. We thought we’d left all trouble behind us.’
‘Ah, that you haven’t, Master, more’s the pity,’ said Butterbur.
‘But it’s no wonder they left you alone. They wouldn’t go for armed
folk, with swords and helmets and shields and all. Make them think
twice, that would. And I must say it put me aback a bit when I saw
you.’
Then the hobbits suddenly realized that people had looked at them
with amazement not out of surprise at their return so much as in
wonder at their gear. They themselves had become so used to warfare
and to riding in well-arrayed companies that they had quite forgotten
that the bright mail peeping from under their cloaks, and the helms
of Gondor and the Mark, and the fair devices on their shields, would
seem outlandish in their own country. And Gandalf, too, was now

H O M E WA R D B O U N D

993

riding on his tall grey horse, all clad in white with a great mantle of
blue and silver over all, and the long sword Glamdring at his side.
Gandalf laughed. ‘Well, well,’ he said, ‘if they are afraid of just
ﬁve of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But at
any rate they will give you peace at night while we stay.’
‘How long will that be?’ said Butterbur. ‘I’ll not deny we should
be glad to have you about for a bit. You see, we’re not used to such
troubles; and the Rangers have all gone away, folk tell me. I don’t
think we’ve rightly understood till now what they did for us. For
there’s been worse than robbers about. Wolves were howling round
the fences last winter. And there’s dark shapes in the woods, dreadful
things that it makes the blood run cold to think of. It’s been very
disturbing, if you understand me.’
‘I expect it has,’ said Gandalf. ‘Nearly all lands have been disturbed
these days, very disturbed. But cheer up, Barliman! You have been
on the edge of very great troubles, and I am only glad to hear that
you have not been deeper in. But better times are coming. Maybe,
better than any you remember. The Rangers have returned. We came
back with them. And there is a king again, Barliman. He will soon
be turning his mind this way.
‘Then the Greenway will be opened again, and his messengers will
come north, and there will be comings and goings, and the evil things
will be driven out of the waste-lands. Indeed the waste in time will
be waste no longer, and there will be people and ﬁelds where once
there was wilderness.’
Mr. Butterbur shook his head. ‘If there’s a few decent respectable
folk on the roads, that won’t do no harm,’ he said. ‘But we don’t
want no more rabble and rufﬁans. And we don’t want no outsiders
at Bree, nor near Bree at all. We want to be let alone. I don’t want
a whole crowd o’ strangers camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.’
‘You will be let alone, Barliman,’ said Gandalf. ‘There is room
enough for realms between Isen and Greyﬂood, or along the shorelands south of the Brandywine, without anyone living within many
days’ ride of Bree. And many folk used to dwell away north, a hundred
miles or more from here, at the far end of the Greenway: on the
North Downs or by Lake Evendim.’
‘Up away by Deadmen’s Dike?’ said Butterbur, looking even more
dubious. ‘That’s haunted land, they say. None but a robber would
go there.’
‘The Rangers go there,’ said Gandalf. ‘Deadmen’s Dike, you say.
So it has been called for long years; but its right name, Barliman, is
Fornost Erain, Norbury of the Kings. And the King will come there
again one day; and then you’ll have some fair folk riding through.’

994

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Well, that sounds more hopeful, I’ll allow,’ said Butterbur. ‘And
it will be good for business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.’
‘He will,’ said Gandalf. ‘He knows it and loves it.’
‘Does he now?’ said Butterbur looking puzzled. ‘Though I’m sure
I don’t know why he should, sitting in his big chair up in his great
castle, hundreds of miles away. And drinking wine out of a golden
cup, I shouldn’t wonder. What’s The Pony to him, or mugs o’ beer?
Not but what my beer’s good, Gandalf. It’s been uncommon good,
since you came in the autumn of last year and put a good word on
it. And that’s been a comfort in trouble, I will say.’
‘Ah!’ said Sam. ‘But he says your beer is always good.’
‘He says?’
‘Of course he does. He’s Strider. The chief of the Rangers. Haven’t
you got that into your head yet?’
It went in at last, and Butterbur’s face was a study in wonder. The
eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and
he gasped. ‘Strider!’ he exclaimed when he got back his breath. ‘Him
with a crown and all and a golden cup! Well, what are we coming
to?’
‘Better times, for Bree at any rate,’ said Gandalf.
‘I hope so, I’m sure,’ said Butterbur. ‘Well, this has been the nicest
chat I’ve had in a month of Mondays. And I’ll not deny that I’ll sleep
easier tonight and with a lighter heart. You’ve given me a powerful
lot to think over, but I’ll put that off until tomorrow. I’m for bed,
and I’ve no doubt you’ll be glad of your beds too. Hey, Nob!’ he
called, going to the door. ‘Nob, you slowcoach!’
‘Nob!’ he said to himself, slapping his forehead. ‘Now what does
that remind me of ?’
‘Not another letter you’ve forgotten, I hope, Mr. Butterbur?’ said
Merry.
‘Now, now, Mr. Brandybuck, don’t go reminding me of that! But
there, you’ve broken my thought. Now where was I? Nob, stables,
ah! that was it. I’ve something that belongs to you. If you recollect
Bill Ferny and the horsethieving: his pony as you bought, well, it’s
here. Come back all of itself, it did. But where it had been to you
know better than me. It was as shaggy as an old dog and as lean as
a clothes-rail, but it was alive. Nob’s looked after it.’
‘What! My Bill?’ cried Sam. ‘Well, I was born lucky, whatever my
gaffer may say. There’s another wish come true! Where is he?’ Sam
would not go to bed until he had visited Bill in his stable.
The travellers stayed in Bree all the next day, and Mr. Butterbur
could not complain of his business next evening at any rate. Curiosity
overcame all fears, and his house was crowded. For a while out of

H O M E WA R D B O U N D

995

politeness the hobbits visited the Common Room in the evening and
answered a good many questions. Bree memories being retentive,
Frodo was asked many times if he had written his book.
‘Not yet,’ he answered. ‘I am going home now to put my notes
in order.’ He promised to deal with the amazing events at Bree, and
so give a bit of interest to a book that appeared likely to treat mostly
of the remote and less important affairs ‘away south’.
Then one of the younger folk called for a song. But at that a
hush fell, and he was frowned down, and the call was not repeated.
Evidently there was no wish for any uncanny events in the Common
Room again.
No trouble by day, nor any sound by night, disturbed the peace
of Bree while the travellers remained there; but the next morning
they got up early, for as the weather was still rainy they wished to
reach the Shire before night, and it was a long ride. The Bree folk
were all out to see them off, and were in merrier mood than they
had been for a year; and those who had not seen the strangers in all
their gear before gaped with wonder at them: at Gandalf with his
white beard, and the light that seemed to gleam from him, as if his
blue mantle was only a cloud over sunshine; and at the four hobbits
like riders upon errantry out of almost forgotten tales. Even those
who had laughed at all the talk about the King began to think there
might be some truth in it.
‘Well, good luck on your road, and good luck to your homecoming!’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘I should have warned you before that all’s
not well in the Shire neither, if what we hear is true. Funny goings
on, they say. But one thing drives out another, and I was full of my
own troubles. But if I may be so bold, you’ve come back changed
from your travels, and you look now like folk as can deal with troubles
out of hand. I don’t doubt you’ll soon set all to rights. Good luck to
you! And the oftener you come back the better I’ll be pleased.’
They wished him farewell and rode away, and passed through the
West-gate and on towards the Shire. Bill the pony was with them,
and as before he had a good deal of baggage, but he trotted along
beside Sam and seemed well content.
‘I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,’ said Frodo.
‘I can guess some of it,’ said Sam gloomily. ‘What I saw in the
Mirror: trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the
Row. I ought to have hurried back quicker.’
‘And something’s wrong with the Southfarthing evidently,’ said
Merry. ‘There’s a general shortage of pipe-weed.’
‘Whatever it is,’ said Pippin, ‘Lotho will be at the bottom of it:
you can be sure of that.’

996

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Deep in, but not at the bottom,’ said Gandalf. ‘You have forgotten
Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor
did.’
‘Well, we’ve got you with us,’ said Merry, ‘so things will soon be
cleared up.’
‘I am with you at present,’ said Gandalf, ‘but soon I shall not be.
I am not coming to the Shire. You must settle its affairs yourselves;
that is what you have been trained for. Do you not yet understand?
My time is over: it is no longer my task to set things to rights, nor
to help folk to do so. And as for you, my dear friends, you will need
no help. You are grown up now. Grown indeed very high; among
the great you are, and I have no longer any fear at all for any of you.
‘But if you would know, I am turning aside soon. I am going to
have a long talk with Bombadil: such a talk as I have not had in all
my time. He is a moss-gatherer, and I have been a stone doomed to
rolling. But my rolling days are ending, and now we shall have much
to say to one another.’
In a little while they came to the point on the East Road where
they had taken leave of Bombadil; and they hoped and half expected
to see him standing there to greet them as they went by. But there
was no sign of him; and there was a grey mist on the Barrow-downs
southwards, and a deep veil over the Old Forest far away.
They halted and Frodo looked south wistfully. ‘I should dearly
like to see the old fellow again,’ he said. ‘I wonder how he is getting
on?’
‘As well as ever, you may be sure,’ said Gandalf. ‘Quite untroubled;
and I should guess, not much interested in anything that we have
done or seen, unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents. There may be
a time later for you to go and see him. But if I were you, I should
press on now for home, or you will not come to the Brandywine
Bridge before the gates are locked.’
‘But there aren’t any gates,’ said Merry, ‘not on the Road; you
know that quite well. There’s the Buckland Gate, of course; but
they’ll let me through that at any time.’
‘There weren’t any gates, you mean,’ said Gandalf. ‘I think you
will ﬁnd some now. And you might have more trouble even at the
Buckland Gate than you think. But you’ll manage all right. Good-bye,
dear friends! Not for the last time, not yet. Good-bye!’
He turned Shadowfax off the Road, and the great horse leaped
the green dike that here ran beside it; and then at a cry from Gandalf
he was gone, racing towards the Barrow-downs like a wind from the
North.
*
*
*

1018

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Where is that miserable Lotho hiding?’ said Merry. They had
searched every room and found no living thing save rats and mice.
‘Shall we turn on the others to search the sheds?’
‘This is worse than Mordor!’ said Sam. ‘Much worse in a way. It
comes home to you, as they say; because it is home, and you remember it before it was all ruined.’
‘Yes, this is Mordor,’ said Frodo. ‘Just one of its works. Saruman
was doing its work all the time, even when he thought he was working
for himself. And the same with those that Saruman tricked, like
Lotho.’
Merry looked round in dismay and disgust. ‘Let’s get out!’ he said.
‘If I had known all the mischief he had caused, I should have stuffed
my pouch down Saruman’s throat.’
‘No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I am able to welcome
you home.’ There standing at the door was Saruman himself, looking well-fed and well-pleased; his eyes gleamed with malice and
amusement.
A sudden light broke on Frodo. ‘Sharkey!’ he cried.
Saruman laughed. ‘So you have heard the name, have you? All
my people used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of
affection, possibly.* But evidently you did not expect to see me here.’
‘I did not,’ said Frodo. ‘But I might have guessed. A little mischief
in a mean way: Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of it.’
‘Quite capable,’ said Saruman, ‘and more than a little. You made
me laugh, you hobbit-lordlings, riding along with all those great
people, so secure and so pleased with your little selves. You thought
you had done very well out of it all, and could now just amble back
and have a nice quiet time in the country. Saruman’s home could
be all wrecked, and he could be turned out, but no one could touch
yours. Oh no! Gandalf would look after your affairs.’
Saruman laughed again. ‘Not he! When his tools have done their
task he drops them. But you must go dangling after him, dawdling
and talking, and riding round twice as far as you needed. ‘‘Well,’’
thought I, ‘‘if they’re such fools, I will get ahead of them and teach
them a lesson. One ill turn deserves another.’’ It would have been a
sharper lesson, if only you had given me a little more time and more
Men. Still I have already done much that you will ﬁnd it hard to
mend or undo in your lives. And it will be pleasant to think of that
and set it against my injuries.’
‘Well, if that is what you ﬁnd pleasure in,’ said Frodo, ‘I pity you.
It will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never
return!’
* It was probably Orkish in origin: sharkû, ‘old man’.

1030

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Far Downs, and to the Towers, and looked on the distant Sea; and
so they rode down at last to Mithlond, to the Grey Havens in the
long ﬁrth of Lune.
As they came to the gates Cı́rdan the Shipwright came forth to
greet them. Very tall he was, and his beard was long, and he was
grey and old, save that his eyes were keen as stars; and he looked at
them and bowed, and said: ‘All is now ready.’
Then Cı́rdan led them to the Havens, and there was a white ship
lying, and upon the quay beside a great grey horse stood a ﬁgure
robed all in white awaiting them. As he turned and came towards
them Frodo saw that Gandalf now wore openly on his hand the Third
Ring, Narya the Great, and the stone upon it was red as ﬁre. Then
those who were to go were glad, for they knew that Gandalf also
would take ship with them.
But Sam was now sorrowful at heart, and it seemed to him that
if the parting would be bitter, more grievous still would be the long
road home alone. But even as they stood there, and the Elves were
going aboard, and all was being made ready to depart, up rode Merry
and Pippin in great haste. And amid his tears Pippin laughed.
‘You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo,’ he
said. ‘This time you have nearly succeeded, but you have failed again.
It was not Sam, though, that gave you away this time, but Gandalf
himself !’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf; ‘for it will be better to ride back three together
than one alone. Well, here at last, dear friends, on the shores of the
Sea comes the end of our fellowship in Middle-earth. Go in peace!
I will not say: do not weep; for not all tears are an evil.’
Then Frodo kissed Merry and Pippin, and last of all Sam, and
went aboard; and the sails were drawn up, and the wind blew, and
slowly the ship slipped away down the long grey ﬁrth; and the light
of the glass of Galadriel that Frodo bore glimmered and was lost.
And the ship went out into the High Sea and passed on into the
West, until at last on a night of rain Frodo smelled a sweet fragrance
on the air and heard the sound of singing that came over the water.
And then it seemed to him that as in his dream in the house of
Bombadil, the grey rain-curtain turned all to silver glass and was
rolled back, and he beheld white shores and beyond them a far green
country under a swift sunrise.
But to Sam the evening deepened to darkness as he stood at the
Haven; and as he looked at the grey sea he saw only a shadow on
the waters that was soon lost in the West. There still he stood far
into the night, hearing only the sigh and murmur of the waves on
the shores of Middle-earth, and the sound of them sank deep into
his heart. Beside him stood Merry and Pippin, and they were silent.
*
*
*

APPENDIX A

1055

he re-entered Mordor long prepared for him. Then the Barad-dûr was raised
once more, and Mount Doom burst into ﬂame, and the last of the folk of
Ithilien ﬂed far away. When Turgon died Saruman took Isengard for his
own, and fortiﬁed it.
‘Ecthelion II, son of Turgon, was a man of wisdom. With what power was
left to him he began to strengthen his realm against the assault of Mordor.
He encouraged all men of worth from near or far to enter his service, and
to those who proved trustworthy he gave rank and reward. In much that he
did he had the aid and advice of a great captain whom he loved above all.
Thorongil men called him in Gondor, the Eagle of the Star, for he was swift
and keen-eyed, and wore a silver star upon his cloak; but no one knew his
true name nor in what land he was born. He came to Ecthelion from Rohan,
where he had served the King Thengel, but he was not one of the Rohirrim.
He was a great leader of men, by land or by sea, but he departed into the
shadows whence he came, before the days of Ecthelion were ended.
‘Thorongil often counselled Ecthelion that the strength of the rebels in
Umbar was a great peril to Gondor, and a threat to the ﬁefs of the south
that would prove deadly, if Sauron moved to open war. At last he got leave
of the Steward and gathered a small ﬂeet, and he came to Umbar unlooked
for by night, and there burned a great part of the ships of the Corsairs. He
himself overthrew the Captain of the Haven in battle upon the quays, and
then he withdrew his ﬂeet with small loss. But when they came back to
Pelargir, to men’s grief and wonder, he would not return to Minas Tirith,
where great honour awaited him.
‘He sent a message of farewell to Ecthelion, saying: ‘‘Other tasks now
call me, lord, and much time and many perils must pass, ere I come again
to Gondor, if that be my fate.’’ Though none could guess what those tasks
might be, nor what summons he had received, it was known whither he
went. For he took boat and crossed over Anduin, and there he said farewell
to his companions and went on alone; and when he was last seen his face
was towards the Mountains of Shadow.
‘There was dismay in the City at the departure of Thorongil, and to all
men it seemed a great loss, unless it were to Denethor, the son of Ecthelion,
a man now ripe for the Stewardship, to which after four years he succeeded
on the death of his father.
‘Denethor II was a proud man, tall, valiant, and more kingly than any
man that had appeared in Gondor for many lives of men; and he was wise
also, and far-sighted, and learned in lore. Indeed he was as like to Thorongil
as to one of nearest kin, and yet was ever placed second to the stranger in
the hearts of men and the esteem of his father. At the time many thought
that Thorongil had departed before his rival became his master; though
indeed Thorongil had never himself vied with Denethor, nor held himself
higher than the servant of his father. And in one matter only were their
counsels to the Steward at variance: Thorongil often warned Ecthelion not
to put trust in Saruman the White in Isengard, but to welcome rather Gandalf
the Grey. But there was little love between Denethor and Gandalf; and after
the days of Ecthelion there was less welcome for the Grey Pilgrim in Minas

1056

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Tirith. Therefore later, when all was made clear, many believed that
Denethor, who was subtle in mind and looked further and deeper than other
men of his day, had discovered who this stranger Thorongil in truth was,
and suspected that he and Mithrandir designed to supplant him.
‘When Denethor became Steward (2984) he proved a masterful lord, holding
the rule of all things in his own hand. He said little. He listened to counsel,
and then followed his own mind. He had married late (2976), taking as wife
Finduilas, daughter of Adrahil of Dol Amroth. She was a lady of great beauty
and gentle heart, but before twelve years had passed she died. Denethor
loved her, in his fashion, more dearly than any other, unless it were the elder
of the sons that she bore him. But it seemed to men that she withered in
the guarded city, as a ﬂower of the seaward vales set upon a barren rock.
The shadow in the east ﬁlled her with horror, and she turned her eyes ever
south to the sea that she missed.
‘After her death Denethor became more grim and silent than before, and
would sit long alone in his tower deep in thought, foreseeing that the assault
of Mordor would come in his time. It was afterwards believed that needing
knowledge, but being proud, and trusting in his own strength of will, he
dared to look in the palantı́r of the White Tower. None of the Stewards had
dared to do this, nor even the kings Eärnil and Eärnur, after the fall of Minas
Ithil when the palantı́r of Isildur came into the hands of the Enemy; for the
Stone of Minas Tirith was the palantı́r of Anárion, most close in accord with
the one that Sauron possessed.
‘In this way Denethor gained his great knowledge of things that passed
in his realm, and far beyond his borders, at which men marvelled; but he
bought the knowledge dearly, being aged before his time by his contest with
the will of Sauron. Thus pride increased in Denethor together with despair,
until he saw in all the deeds of that time only a single combat between the
Lord of the White Tower and the Lord of the Barad-dûr, and mistrusted all
others who resisted Sauron, unless they served himself alone.
‘So time drew on to the War of the Ring, and the sons of Denethor grew
to manhood. Boromir, ﬁve years the elder, beloved by his father, was like
him in face and pride, but in little else. Rather he was a man after the sort
of King Eärnur of old, taking no wife and delighting chieﬂy in arms; fearless
and strong, but caring little for lore, save the tales of old battles. Faramir
the younger was like him in looks but otherwise in mind. He read the hearts
of men as shrewdly as his father, but what he read moved him sooner to pity
than to scorn. He was gentle in bearing, and a lover of lore and of music,
and therefore by many in those days his courage was judged less than his
brother’s. But it was not so, except that he did not seek glory in danger
without a purpose. He welcomed Gandalf at such times as he came to the
City, and he learned what he could from his wisdom; and in this as in many
other matters he displeased his father.
‘Yet between the brothers there was great love, and had been since childhood, when Boromir was the helper and protector of Faramir. No jealousy
or rivalry had arisen between them since, for their father’s favour or for the
praise of men. It did not seem possible to Faramir that anyone in Gondor

1060

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

We will speak no more of this until many have passed. The days darken,
and much evil is to come.’’
‘Then Aragorn took leave lovingly of Elrond; and the next day he said farewell
to his mother, and to the house of Elrond, and to Arwen, and he went out
into the wild. For nearly thirty years he laboured in the cause against Sauron;
and he became a friend of Gandalf the Wise, from whom he gained much
wisdom. With him he made many perilous journeys, but as the years wore
on he went more often alone. His ways were hard and long, and he became
somewhat grim to look upon, unless he chanced to smile; and yet he seemed
to Men worthy of honour, as a king that is in exile, when he did not hide
his true shape. For he went in many guises, and won renown under many
names. He rode in the host of the Rohirrim, and fought for the Lord of
Gondor by land and by sea; and then in the hour of victory he passed out
of the knowledge of Men of the West, and went alone far into the East and
deep into the South, exploring the hearts of Men, both evil and good, and
uncovering the plots and devices of the servants of Sauron.
‘Thus he became at last the most hardy of living Men, skilled in their
crafts and lore, and was yet more than they; for he was elven-wise, and there
was a light in his eyes that when they were kindled few could endure. His
face was sad and stern because of the doom that was laid on him, and yet
hope dwelt ever in the depths of his heart, from which mirth would arise at
times like a spring from the rock.
‘It came to pass that when Aragorn was nine and forty years of age he
returned from perils on the dark conﬁnes of Mordor, where Sauron now
dwelt again and was busy with evil. He was weary and he wished to go back
to Rivendell and rest there for a while ere he journeyed into the far countries;
and on his way he came to the borders of Lórien and was admitted to the
hidden land by the Lady Galadriel.
‘He did not know it, but Arwen Undómiel was also there, dwelling again
for a time with the kin of her mother. She was little changed, for the mortal
years had passed her by; yet her face was more grave, and her laughter now
seldom was heard. But Aragorn was grown to full stature of body and mind,
and Galadriel bade him cast aside his wayworn raiment, and she clothed
him in silver and white, with a cloak of elven-grey and a bright gem on his
brow. Then more than any king of Men he appeared, and seemed rather an
Elf-lord from the Isles of the West. And thus it was that Arwen ﬁrst beheld
him again after their long parting; and as he came walking towards her under
the trees of Caras Galadhon laden with ﬂowers of gold, her choice was made
and her doom appointed.
‘Then for a season they wandered together in the glades of Lothlórien,
until it was time for him to depart. And on the evening of Midsummer
Aragorn, Arathorn’s son, and Arwen daughter of Elrond went to the fair hill,
Cerin Amroth, in the midst of the land, and they walked unshod on the
undying grass with elanor and niphredil about their feet. And there upon
that hill they looked east to the Shadow and west to the Twilight, and they
plighted their troth and were glad.

APPENDIX A

1069

thought that they had all been hunted out; but it was not so.
2780–2851 12. Walda. He was king only nine years. He was slain with all
his companions when they were trapped by Orcs, as they rode
by mountain-paths from Dunharrow.
2804–64
13. Folca. He was a great hunter, but he vowed to chase no wild
beast while there was an Orc left in Rohan. When the last
orc-hold was found and destroyed, he went to hunt the great
boar of Everholt in the Firien Wood. He slew the boar but died
of the tusk-wounds that it gave him.
2830–2903 14. Folcwine. When he became king the Rohirrim had recovered
their strength. He reconquered the west-march (between Adorn
and Isen) that Dunlendings had occupied. Rohan had received
great help from Gondor in the evil days. When, therefore, he
heard that the Haradrim were assailing Gondor with great
strength, he sent many men to the help of the Steward. He
wished to lead them himself, but was dissuaded, and his twin
sons Folcred and Fastred (born 2858) went in his stead. They
fell side by side in battle in Ithilien (2885). Túrin II of Gondor
sent to Folcwine a rich weregild of gold.
2870–2953 15. Fengel. He was the third son and fourth child of Folcwine.
He is not remembered with praise. He was greedy of food and
of gold, and at strife with his marshals, and with his children.
Thengel, his third child and only son, left Rohan when he came
to manhood and lived long in Gondor, and won honour in the
service of Turgon.
2905–80
16. Thengel. He took no wife until late, but in 2943 he wedded
Morwen of Lossarnach in Gondor, though she was seventeen
years the younger. She bore him three children in Gondor, of
whom Théoden, the second, was his only son. When Fengel
died the Rohirrim recalled him, and he returned unwillingly.
But he proved a good and wise king; though the speech of
Gondor was used in his house, and not all men thought that
good. Morwen bore him two more daughters in Rohan; and
the last, Théodwyn, was the fairest, though she came late
(2963), the child of his age. Her brother loved her dearly.
It was soon after Thengel’s return that Saruman declared
himself Lord of Isengard and began to give trouble to Rohan,
encroaching on its borders and supporting its enemies.
2948–3019 17. Théoden. He is called Théoden Ednew in the lore of Rohan,
for he fell into a decline under the spells of Saruman, but was
healed by Gandalf, and in the last year of his life arose and led
his men to victory at the Hornburg, and soon after to the Fields
of Pelennor, the greatest battle of the Age. He fell before the
gates of Mundburg. For a while he rested in the land of his
birth, among the dead Kings of Gondor, but was brought back
and laid in the eighth mound of his line at Edoras. Then a new
line was begun.

APPENDIX A

1077

ning of a kind to resist most steadfastly any domination. Though they could
be slain or broken, they could not be reduced to shadows enslaved to another
will; and for the same reason their lives were not affected by any Ring, to
live either longer or shorter because of it. All the more did Sauron hate the
possessors and desire to dispossess them.
It was therefore perhaps partly by the malice of the Ring that Thráin after
some years became restless and discontented. The lust for gold was ever in
his mind. At last, when he could endure it no longer, he turned his thoughts
to Erebor, and resolved to go back there. He said nothing to Thorin of what
was in his heart; but with Balin and Dwalin and a few others, he arose and
said farewell and departed.
Little is known of what happened to him afterwards. It would now seem
that as soon as he was abroad with few companions he was hunted by the
emissaries of Sauron. Wolves pursued him, Orcs waylaid him, evil birds
shadowed his path, and the more he strove to go north the more misfortunes
opposed him. There came a dark night when he and his companions were
wandering in the land beyond Anduin, and they were driven by a black rain
to take shelter under the eaves of Mirkwood. In the morning he was gone
from the camp, and his companions called him in vain. They searched for
him many days, until at last giving up hope they departed and came at length
back to Thorin. Only long after was it learned that Thráin had been taken
alive and brought to the pits of Dol Guldur. There he was tormented and
the Ring taken from him, and there at last he died.
So Thorin Oakenshield became the Heir of Durin, but an heir without
hope. When Thráin was lost he was ninety-ﬁve, a great dwarf of proud
bearing; but he seemed content to remain in Eriador. There he laboured
long, and trafﬁcked, and gained such wealth as he could; and his people
were increased by many of the wandering Folk of Durin who heard of his
dwelling in the west and came to him. Now they had fair halls in the mountains, and store of goods, and their days did not seem so hard, though in
their songs they spoke ever of the Lonely Mountain far away.
The years lengthened. The embers in the heart of Thorin grew hot again,
as he brooded on the wrongs of his House and the vengeance upon the
Dragon that he had inherited. He thought of weapons and armies and alliances, as his great hammer rang in his forge; but the armies were dispersed
and the alliances broken and the axes of his people were few; and a great
anger without hope burned him as he smote the red iron on the anvil.
But at last there came about by chance a meeting between Gandalf and
Thorin that changed all the fortunes of the House of Durin, and led to other
and greater ends beside. On a time1 Thorin, returning west from a journey,
stayed at Bree for the night. There Gandalf was also. He was on his way to
the Shire, which he had not visited for some twenty years. He was weary,
and thought to rest there for a while.
Among many cares he was troubled in mind by the perilous state of the
1

March 15, 2941.

1078

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

North; because he knew then already that Sauron was plotting war, and
intended, as soon as he felt strong enough, to attack Rivendell. But to resist
any attempt from the East to regain the lands of Angmar and the northern
passes in the mountains there were now only the Dwarves of the Iron Hills.
And beyond them lay the desolation of the Dragon. The Dragon Sauron
might use with terrible effect. How then could the end of Smaug be achieved?
It was even as Gandalf sat and pondered this that Thorin stood before
him, and said: ‘Master Gandalf, I know you only by sight, but now I should
be glad to speak with you. For you have often come into my thoughts of
late, as if I were bidden to seek you. Indeed I should have done so, if I had
known where to ﬁnd you.’
Gandalf looked at him with wonder. ‘That is strange, Thorin Oakenshield,’ he said. ‘For I have thought of you also; and though I am on my way
to the Shire, it was in my mind that is the way also to your halls.’
‘Call them so, if you will,’ said Thorin. ‘They are only poor lodgings in
exile. But you would be welcome there, if you would come. For they say
that you are wise and know more than any other of what goes on in the
world; and I have much on my mind and would be glad of your counsel.’
‘I will come,’ said Gandalf; ‘for I guess that we share one trouble at least.
The Dragon of Erebor is on my mind, and I do not think that he will be
forgotten by the grandson of Thrór.’
The story is told elsewhere of what came of that meeting: of the strange plan
that Gandalf made for the help of Thorin, and how Thorin and his companions set out from the Shire on the quest of the Lonely Mountain that
came to great ends unforeseen. Here only those things are recalled that
directly concern Durin’s Folk.
The Dragon was slain by Bard of Esgaroth, but there was battle in Dale.
For the Orcs came down upon Erebor as soon as they heard of the return
of the Dwarves; and they were led by Bolg, son of that Azog whom Dáin
slew in his youth. In that ﬁrst Battle of Dale, Thorin Oakenshield was mortally wounded; and he died and was laid in a tomb under the Mountain with
the Arkenstone upon his breast. There fell also Fı́li and Kı́li, his sister-sons.
But Dáin Ironfoot, his cousin, who came from the Iron Hills to his aid and
was also his rightful heir, became then King Dáin II, and the Kingdom under
the Mountain was restored, even as Gandalf had desired. Dáin proved a
great and wise king, and the Dwarves prospered and grew strong again in
his day.
In the late summer of that same year (2941) Gandalf had at last prevailed
upon Saruman and the White Council to attack Dol Guldur, and Sauron
retreated and went to Mordor, there to be secure, as he thought, from all
his enemies. So it was that when the War came at last the main assault was
turned southwards; yet even so with his far-stretched right hand Sauron
might have done great evil in the North, if King Dáin and King Brand had
not stood in his path. Even as Gandalf said afterwards to Frodo and Gimli,
when they dwelt together for a time in Minas Tirith. Not long before news
had come to Gondor of events far away.
‘I grieved at the fall of Thorin,’ said Gandalf; ‘and now we hear that Dáin

1080

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

has fallen, ﬁghting in Dale again, even while we fought here. I should call
that a heavy loss, if it was not a wonder rather that in his great age he could
still wield his axe as mightily as they say that he did, standing over the body
of King Brand before the Gate of Erebor until the darkness fell.
‘Yet things might have gone far otherwise and far worse. When you think
of the great Battle of the Pelennor, do not forget the battles in Dale and the
valour of Durin’s Folk. Think of what might have been. Dragon-ﬁre and
savage swords in Eriador, night in Rivendell. There might be no Queen in
Gondor. We might now hope to return from the victory here only to ruin
and ash. But that has been averted – because I met Thorin Oakenshield
one evening on the edge of spring in Bree. A chance-meeting, as we say in
Middle-earth.’
Dı́s was the daughter of Thráin II. She is the only dwarf-woman named in
these histories. It was said by Gimli that there are few dwarf-women, probably
no more than a third of the whole people. They seldom walk abroad except
at great need. They are in voice and appearance, and in garb if they must
go on a journey, so like to the dwarf-men that the eyes and ears of other
peoples cannot tell them apart. This has given rise to the foolish opinion
among Men that there are no dwarf-women, and that the Dwarves ‘grow
out of stone’.
It is because of the fewness of women among them that the kind of the
Dwarves increases slowly, and is in peril when they have no secure dwellings.
For Dwarves take only one wife or husband each in their lives, and are
jealous, as in all matters of their rights. The number of dwarf-men that marry
is actually less than one-third. For not all the women take husbands: some
desire none; some desire one that they cannot get, and so will have no other.
As for the men, very many also do not desire marriage, being engrossed in
their crafts.
Gimli Glóin’s son is renowned, for he was one of the Nine Walkers that set
out with the Ring; and he remained in the company of King Elessar throughout the War. He was named Elf-friend because of the great love that grew
between him and Legolas, son of King Thranduil, and because of his reverence for the Lady Galadriel.
After the fall of Sauron, Gimli brought south a part of the Dwarf-folk of
Erebor, and he became Lord of the Glittering Caves. He and his people did
great works in Gondor and Rohan. For Minas Tirith they forged gates of
mithril and steel to replace those broken by the Witch-king. Legolas his friend
also brought south Elves out of Greenwood, and they dwelt in Ithilien, and
it became once again the fairest country in all the westlands.
But when King Elessar gave up his life Legolas followed at last the desire of
his heart and sailed over Sea.

APPENDIX B

1085

called by the Eldar Curunı́r, ‘the Man of Skill’, and Mithrandir, ‘the Grey
Pilgrim’, but by Men in the North Saruman and Gandalf. Curunı́r journeyed
often into the East, but dwelt at last in Isengard. Mithrandir was closest in
friendship with the Eldar, and wandered mostly in the West, and never made
for himself any lasting abode.
Throughout the Third Age the guardianship of the Three Rings was
known only to those who possessed them. But at the end it became known
that they had been held at ﬁrst by the three greatest of the Eldar: Gil-galad,
Galadriel and Cı́rdan. Gil-galad before he died gave his ring to Elrond;
Cı́rdan later surrendered his to Mithrandir. For Cı́rdan saw further and
deeper than any other in Middle-earth, and he welcomed Mithrandir at the
Grey Havens, knowing whence he came and whither he would return.
‘Take this ring, Master,’ he said, ‘for your labours will be heavy; but it
will support you in the weariness that you have taken upon yourself. For this
is the Ring of Fire, and with it you may rekindle hearts in a world that grows
chill. But as for me, my heart is with the Sea, and I will dwell by the grey
shores until the last ship sails. I will await you.’
Year
2 Isildur plants a seedling of the White Tree in Minas Anor. He
delivers the South-kingdom to Meneldil. Disaster of the Gladden
Fields; Isildur and his three elder sons are slain.
3 Ohtar brings the shards of Narsil to Imladris.
10 Valandil becomes King of Arnor.
109 Elrond weds Celebrı́an, daughter of Celeborn.
130 Birth of Elladan and Elrohir, sons of Elrond.
241 Birth of Arwen Undómiel.
420 King Ostoher rebuilds Minas Anor.
490 First invasion of Easterlings.
500 Rómendacil I defeats the Easterlings.
541 Rómendacil slain in battle.
830 Falastur begins the line of the Ship-kings of Gondor.
861 Death of Eärendur, and division of Arnor.
933 King Eärnil I takes Umbar, which becomes a fortress of Gondor.
936 Eärnil lost at sea.
1015 King Ciryandil slain in the siege of Umbar.
1050 Hyarmendacil conquers the Harad. Gondor reaches the height
of its power. About this time a shadow falls on Greenwood, and
men begin to call it Mirkwood. The Periannath are ﬁrst mentioned in records, with the coming of the Harfoots to Eriador.
c. 1100 The Wise (the Istari and the chief Eldar) discover that an evil
power has made a stronghold at Dol Guldur. It is thought to be
one of the Nazgûl.
1149 Reign of Atanatar Alcarin begins.
c. 1150 The Fallohides enter Eriador. The Stoors come over the Redhorn
Pass and move to the Angle, or to Dunland.
c. 1300 Evil things begin to multiply again. Orcs increase in the Misty
Mountains and attack the Dwarves. The Nazgûl reappear. The

1086

1356
1409
1432
1437
1447
1448
1540
1551
1601
c. 1630
1634
1636

1640
1810
1851
1856
1899
1900
1940
1944
1945
1974
1975

1976

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

chief of these comes north to Angmar. The Periannath migrate
westward; many settle at Bree.
King Argeleb I slain in battle with Rhudaur. About this time the
Stoors leave the Angle, and some return to Wilderland.
The Witch-king of Angmar invades Arnor. King Arveleg I slain.
Fornost and Tyrn Gorthad are defended. The Tower of Amon
Sûl destroyed.
King Valacar of Gondor dies, and the civil war of the Kin-strife
begins.
Burning of Osgiliath and loss of the palantı́r. Eldacar ﬂees to
Rhovanion; his son Ornendil is murdered.
Eldacar returns and drives out the usurper Castamir. Battle of
the Crossings of Erui. Siege of Pelargir.
Rebels escape and seize Umbar.
King Aldamir slain in war with the Harad and Corsairs of Umbar.
Hyarmendacil II defeats the Men of Harad.
Many Periannath migrate from Bree, and are granted land beyond
Baranduin by Argeleb II.
They are joined by Stoors coming up from Dunland.
The Corsairs ravage Pelargir and slay King Minardil.
The Great Plague devastates Gondor. Death of King Telemnar
and his children. The White Tree dies in Minas Anor. The plague
spreads north and west, and many parts of Eriador become desolate. Beyond the Baranduin the Periannath survive, but suffer
great loss.
King Tarondor removes the King’s House to Minas Anor, and
plants a seedling of the White Tree. Osgiliath begins to fall into
ruin. Mordor is left unguarded.
King Telumehtar Umbardacil retakes Umbar and drives out the
Corsairs.
The attacks of the Wainriders upon Gondor begin.
Gondor loses its eastern territories, and Narmacil II falls in battle.
King Calimehtar defeats the Wainriders on Dagorlad.
Calimehtar builds the White Tower in Minas Anor.
Gondor and Arnor renew communications and form an alliance.
Arvedui weds Fı́riel daughter of Ondoher of Gondor.
Ondoher falls in battle. Eärnil defeats the enemy in South Ithilien.
He then wins the Battle of the Camp, and drives Wainriders into
the Dead Marshes. Arvedui claims the crown of Gondor.
Eärnil II receives the crown.
End of the North-kingdom. The Witch-king overruns Arthedain
and takes Fornost.
Arvedui drowned in the Bay of Forochel. The palantı́ri of
Annúminas and Amon Sûl are lost. Eärnur brings a ﬂeet to
Lindon. The Witch-king defeated at the Battle of Fornost, and
pursued to the Ettenmoors. He vanishes from the North.
Aranarth takes the title of Chieftain of the Dúnedain. The heirlooms of Arnor are given into the keeping of Elrond.

APPENDIX B

1087

´
1977 Frumgar leads the Eothéod
into the North.
1979 Bucca of the Marish becomes ﬁrst Thain of the Shire.
1980 The Witch-king comes to Mordor and there gathers the Nazgûl.
A Balrog appears in Moria, and slays Durin VI.
1981 Náin I slain. The Dwarves ﬂee from Moria. Many of the Silvan
Elves of Lórien ﬂee south. Amroth and Nimrodel are lost.
1999 Thráin I comes to Erebor and founds a dwarf-kingdom ‘under
the Mountain’.
2000 The Nazgûl issue from Mordor and besiege Minas Ithil.
2002 Fall of Minas Ithil, afterwards known as Minas Morgul. The
palantı́r is captured.
2043 Eärnur becomes King of Gondor. He is challenged by the
Witch-king.
2050 The challenge is renewed. Eärnur rides to Minas Morgul and is
lost. Mardil becomes the ﬁrst Ruling Steward.
2060 The power of Dol Guldur grows. The Wise fear that it may be
Sauron taking shape again.
2063 Gandalf goes to Dol Guldur. Sauron retreats and hides in the
East. The Watchful Peace begins. The Nazgûl remain quiet in
Minas Morgul.
2210 Thorin I leaves Erebor, and goes north to the Grey Mountains,
where most of the remnants of Durin’s Folk are now gathering.
2340 Isumbras I becomes thirteenth Thain, and ﬁrst of the Took line.
The Oldbucks occupy the Buckland.
2460 The Watchful Peace ends. Sauron returns with increased strength
to Dol Guldur.
2463 The White Council is formed. About this time Déagol the Stoor
ﬁnds the One Ring, and is murdered by Sméagol.
2470 About this time Sméagol-Gollum hides in the Misty Mountains.
2475 Attack on Gondor renewed. Osgiliath ﬁnally ruined, and its stonebridge broken.
c. 2480 Orcs begin to make secret strongholds in the Misty Mountains
so as to bar all the passes into Eriador. Sauron begins to people
Moria with his creatures.
2509 Celebrı́an, journeying to Lórien, is waylaid in the Redhorn Pass,
and receives a poisoned wound.
2510 Celebrı́an departs over Sea. Orcs and Easterlings overrun Calenardhon. Eorl the Young wins the victory of the Field of Celebrant.
The Rohirrim settle in Calenardhon.
2545 Eorl falls in battle in the Wold.
2569 Brego son of Eorl completes the Golden Hall.
2570 Baldor son of Brego enters the Forbidden Door and is lost. About
this time Dragons reappear in the far North and begin to afﬂict
the Dwarves.
2589 Dáin I slain by a Dragon.
2590 Thrór returns to Erebor. Grór his brother goes to the Iron Hills.
c. 2670 Tobold plants ‘pipe-weed’ in the Southfarthing.

1088

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

2683 Isengrim II becomes tenth Thain and begins the excavation of
Great Smials.
2698 Ecthelion I rebuilds the White Tower in Minas Tirith.
2740 Orcs renew their invasions of Eriador.
2747 Bandobras Took defeats an Orc-band in the Northfarthing.
2758 Rohan attacked from west and east and overrun. Gondor attacked
by ﬂeets of the Corsairs. Helm of Rohan takes refuge in Helm’s
Deep. Wulf seizes Edoras. 2758–9: The Long Winter follows.
Great suffering and loss of life in Eriador and Rohan. Gandalf
comes to the aid of the Shire-folk.
2759 Death of Helm. Fréaláf drives out Wulf, and begins second line
of Kings of the Mark. Saruman takes up his abode in Isengard.
2770 Smaug the Dragon descends on Erebor. Dale destroyed. Thrór
escapes with Thráin II and Thorin II.
2790 Thrór slain by an Orc in Moria. The Dwarves gather for a war
of vengeance. Birth of Gerontius, later known as the Old Took.
2793 The War of the Dwarves and Orcs begins.
2799 Battle of Nanduhirion before the East-gate of Moria. Dáin Ironfoot returns to the Iron Hills. Thráin II and his son Thorin wander
westwards. They settle in the South of Ered Luin beyond the
Shire (2802).
2800–64 Orcs from the North trouble Rohan. King Walda slain by them
(2861).
2841 Thráin II sets out to revisit Erebor, but is pursued by the servants
of Sauron.
2845 Thráin the Dwarf is imprisoned in Dol Guldur; the last of the
Seven Rings is taken from him.
2850 Gandalf again enters Dol Guldur, and discovers that its master
is indeed Sauron, who is gathering all the Rings and seeking for
news of the One, and of Isildur’s Heir. He ﬁnds Thráin and
receives the key of Erebor. Thráin dies in Dol Guldur.
2851 The White Council meets. Gandalf urges an attack on Dol
Guldur. Saruman overrules him.1 Saruman begins to search near
the Gladden Fields.
2872 Belecthor II of Gondor dies. The White Tree dies, and no seedling can be found. The Dead Tree is left standing.
2885 Stirred up by emissaries of Sauron the Haradrim cross the Poros
and attack Gondor. The sons of Folcwine of Rohan are slain in
the service of Gondor.
2890 Bilbo born in the Shire.
2901 Most of the remaining inhabitants of Ithilien desert it owing to
the attacks of Uruks of Mordor. The secret refuge of Henneth
Annûn is built.
2907 Birth of Gilraen mother of Aragorn II.
1
It afterwards became clear that Saruman had then begun to desire to possess the
One Ring himself, and he hoped that it might reveal itself, seeking its master, if Sauron
were let be for a time.

APPENDIX B

1089

2911 The Fell Winter. The Baranduin and other rivers are frozen.
White Wolves invade Eriador from the North.
2912 Great ﬂoods devastate Enedwaith and Minhiriath. Tharbad is
ruined and deserted.
2920 Death of the Old Took.
2929 Arathorn son of Arador of the Dúnedain weds Gilraen.
2930 Arador slain by Trolls. Birth of Denethor II son of Ecthelion II
in Minas Tirith.
2931 Aragorn son of Arathorn II born on March 1st.
2933 Arathorn II slain. Gilraen takes Aragorn to Imladris. Elrond
receives him as foster-son and gives him the name Estel (Hope);
his ancestry is concealed.
2939 Saruman discovers that Sauron’s servants are searching the Anduin
near Gladden Fields, and that Sauron therefore has learned of
Isildur’s end. He is alarmed, but says nothing to the Council.
2941 Thorin Oakenshield and Gandalf visit Bilbo in the Shire. Bilbo
meets Sméagol-Gollum and ﬁnds the Ring. The White Council
meets; Saruman agrees to an attack on Dol Guldur, since he now
wishes to prevent Sauron from searching the River. Sauron having
made his plans abandons Dol Guldur. The Battle of the Five
Armies in Dale. Death of Thorin II. Bard of Esgaroth slays
Smaug. Dáin of the Iron Hills becomes King under the Mountain
(Dáin II).
2942 Bilbo returns to the Shire with the Ring. Sauron returns in secret
to Mordor.
2944 Bard rebuilds Dale and becomes King. Gollum leaves the Mountains and begins his search for the ‘thief ’ of the Ring.
2948 Théoden son of Thengel, King of Rohan, born.
2949 Gandalf and Balin visit Bilbo in the Shire.
2950 Finduilas, daughter of Adrahil of Dol Amroth, born.
2951 Sauron declares himself openly and gathers power in Mordor.
He begins the rebuilding of Barad-dûr. Gollum turns towards
Mordor. Sauron sends three of the Nazgûl to reoccupy Dol
Guldur.
Elrond reveals to ‘Estel’ his true name and ancestry, and
delivers to him the shards of Narsil. Arwen, newly returned from
Lórien, meets Aragorn in the woods of Imladris. Aragorn goes
out into the Wild.
2953 Last meeting of the White Council. They debate the Rings.
Saruman feigns that he has discovered that the One Ring has
passed down Anduin to the Sea. Saruman withdraws to Isengard,
which he takes as his own, and fortiﬁes it. Being jealous and
afraid of Gandalf he sets spies to watch all his movements; and
notes his interest in the Shire. He soon begins to keep agents in
Bree and the Southfarthing.
2954 Mount Doom bursts into ﬂame again. The last inhabitants of
Ithilien ﬂee over Anduin.
2956 Aragorn meets Gandalf and their friendship begins.

1090

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

2957–80 Aragorn undertakes his great journeys and errantries. As
Thorongil he serves in disguise both Thengel of Rohan and
Ecthelion II of Gondor.
2968 Birth of Frodo.
2976 Denethor weds Finduilas of Dol Amroth.
2977 Bain son of Bard becomes King of Dale.
2978 Birth of Boromir son of Denethor II.
2980 Aragorn enters Lórien, and there meets again Arwen Undómiel.
Aragorn gives her the ring of Barahir, and they plight their troth
upon the hill of Cerin Amroth. About this time Gollum reaches
the conﬁnes of Mordor and becomes acquainted with Shelob.
Théoden becomes King of Rohan. Birth of Samwise.
2983 Faramir son of Denethor born.
2984 Death of Ecthelion II. Denethor II becomes Steward of Gondor.
2988 Finduilas dies young.
2989 Balin leaves Erebor and enters Moria.
2991 Éomer Éomund’s son born in Rohan.
2994 Balin perishes, and the dwarf-colony is destroyed.
2995 Éowyn sister of Éomer born.
c. 3000 The shadow of Mordor lengthens. Saruman dares to use the
palantı́r of Orthanc, but becomes ensnared by Sauron, who has
the Ithil-stone. He becomes a traitor to the Council. His spies
report that the Shire is being closely guarded by the Rangers.
3001 Bilbo’s farewell feast. Gandalf suspects his ring to be the One
Ring. The guard on the Shire is doubled. Gandalf seeks for news
of Gollum and calls on the help of Aragorn.
3002 Bilbo becomes a guest of Elrond, and settles in Rivendell.
3004 Gandalf visits Frodo in the Shire, and does so at intervals during
the next four years.
3007 Brand son of Bain becomes King in Dale. Death of Gilraen.
3008 In the autumn Gandalf pays his last visit to Frodo.
3009 Gandalf and Aragorn renew their hunt for Gollum at intervals
during the next eight years, searching in the vales of Anduin,
Mirkwood, and Rhovanion to the conﬁnes of Mordor. At some
time during these years Gollum himself ventured into Mordor,
and was captured by Sauron. Elrond sends for Arwen, and she
returns to Imladris; the Mountains and all lands eastward are
becoming dangerous.
3017 Gollum is released from Mordor. He is taken by Aragorn in the
Dead Marshes, and brought to Thranduil in Mirkwood. Gandalf
visits Minas Tirith and reads the scroll of Isildur.

APPENDIX B

1091

the great years

12
20

3018
April
Gandalf reaches Hobbiton.
June
Sauron attacks Osgiliath. About the same time Thranduil is
attacked, and Gollum escapes.

Mid-year’s Day Gandalf meets Radagast.
4
10

July
Boromir sets out from Minas Tirith.
Gandalf imprisoned in Orthanc.
August
All trace of Gollum is lost. It is thought that at about this time,
being hunted both by the Elves and Sauron’s servants, he took
refuge in Moria; but when he had at last discovered the way to the
West-gate he could not get out.

18
19
20
21
22
23

24
26
27
28
29
30

1
3

September
Gandalf escapes from Orthanc in the early hours. The Black Riders
cross the Fords of Isen.
Gandalf comes to Edoras as a beggar, and is refused admittance.
Gandalf gains entrance to Edoras. Théoden commands him to go:
‘Take any horse, only be gone ere tomorrow is old!’
Gandalf meets Shadowfax, but the horse will not allow him to come
near. He follows Shadowfax far over the ﬁelds.
The Black Riders reach Sarn Ford at evening; they drive off the
guard of Rangers. Gandalf overtakes Shadowfax.
Four Riders enter the Shire before dawn. The others pursue the
Rangers eastward, and then return to watch the Greenway. A Black
Rider comes to Hobbiton at nightfall. Frodo leaves Bag End.
Gandalf having tamed Shadowfax rides from Rohan.
Gandalf crosses the Isen.
The Old Forest. Frodo comes to Bombadil.
Gandalf crosses Greyﬂood. Second night with Bombadil.
The Hobbits captured by a Barrow-wight. Gandalf reaches Sarn
Ford.
Frodo reaches Bree at night. Gandalf visits the Gaffer.
Crickhollow and the Inn at Bree are raided in the early hours. Frodo
leaves Bree. Gandalf comes to Crickhollow, and reaches Bree at night.
October
Gandalf leaves Bree.
He is attacked at night on Weathertop.

1092

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

6
9
11
13
18
20
24
25

The camp under Weathertop attacked at night. Frodo wounded.
Glorﬁndel leaves Rivendell.
He drives the Riders off the Bridge of Mitheithel.
Frodo crosses the Bridge.
Glorﬁndel ﬁnds Frodo at dusk. Gandalf reaches Rivendell.
Escape across the Ford of Bruinen.
Frodo recovers and wakes. Boromir arrives in Rivendell at night.
Council of Elrond.

25

December
The Company of the Ring leaves Rivendell at dusk.

8
11, 12
13
14
15
17
23
25

15
16
17
23
25
26

27
28
29

30

3019
January
The Company reach Hollin.
Snow on Caradhras.
Attack by Wolves in the early hours. The Company reaches Westgate of Moria at nightfall. Gollum begins to trail the Ring-bearer.
Night in Hall Twenty-one.
The Bridge of Khazad-dûm, and fall of Gandalf. The Company
reaches Nimrodel late at night.
The Company comes to Caras Galadhon at evening.
Gandalf pursues the Balrog to the peak of Zirakzigil.
He casts down the Balrog, and passes away. His body lies on the
peak.
February
The Mirror of Galadriel. Gandalf returns to life, and lies in a trance.
Farewell to Lórien. Gollum in hiding on the west bank observes
the departure.
Gwaihir bears Gandalf to Lórien.
The boats are attacked at night near Sarn Gebir.
The Company pass the Argonath and camp at Parth Galen. First
Battle of the Fords of Isen; Théodred son of Théoden slain.
Breaking of the Fellowship. Death of Boromir; his horn is heard in
Minas Tirith. Meriadoc and Peregrin captured. Frodo and Samwise
enter the eastern Emyn Muil. Aragorn sets out in pursuit of the
´
Orcs at evening. Eomer
hears of the descent of the Orc-band from
Emyn Muil.
´
Aragorn reaches the west-cliff at sunrise. Eomer
against Théoden’s
orders sets out from Eastfold about midnight to pursue the Orcs.
´
Eomer
overtakes the Orcs just outside Fangorn Forest.
Meriadoc and Pippin escape and meet Treebeard. The Rohirrim
attack at sunrise and destroy the Orcs. Frodo descends from the
Emyn Muil and meets Gollum. Faramir sees the funeral boat of
Boromir.
´
Entmoot begins. Eomer
returning to Edoras meets Aragorn.

APPENDIX B

1
2

3
4
5

6
7
8
9

10

11

12
13
14
15

1093

March
Frodo begins the passage of the Dead Marshes at dawn. Entmoot
continues. Aragorn meets Gandalf the White. They set out for
Edoras. Faramir leaves Minas Tirith on an errand to Ithilien.
Frodo comes to the end of the Marshes. Gandalf comes to Edoras
and heals Théoden. The Rohirrim ride west against Saruman.
Second Battle of Fords of Isen. Erkenbrand defeated. Entmoot
ends in afternoon. The Ents march on Isengard and reach it at
night.
Théoden retreats to Helm’s Deep. Battle of the Hornburg begins.
Ents complete the destruction of Isengard.
Théoden and Gandalf set out from Helm’s Deep for Isengard.
Frodo reaches the slag-mounds on the edge of the Desolation of
the Morannon.
Théoden reaches Isengard at noon. Parley with Saruman in Orthanc. Winged Nazgûl passes over the camp at Dol Baran. Gandalf
sets out with Peregrin for Minas Tirith. Frodo hides in sight of the
Morannon, and leaves at dusk.
Aragorn overtaken by the Dúnedain in the early hours. Théoden
sets out from the Hornburg for Harrowdale. Aragorn sets out later.
Frodo taken by Faramir to Henneth Annûn. Aragorn comes to
Dunharrow at nightfall.
Aragorn takes the ‘Paths of the Dead’ at daybreak; he reaches Erech
at midnight. Frodo leaves Henneth Annûn.
Gandalf reaches Minas Tirith. Faramir leaves Henneth Annûn.
Aragorn sets out from Erech and comes to Calembel. At dusk
Frodo reaches the Morgul-road. Théoden comes to Dunharrow.
Darkness begins to ﬂow out of Mordor.
The Dawnless Day. The Muster of Rohan: the Rohirrim ride from
Harrowdale. Faramir rescued by Gandalf outside the gates of the
City. Aragorn crosses Ringló. An army from the Morannon takes
Cair Andros and passes into Anórien. Frodo passes the Cross-roads,
and sees the Morgul-host set forth.
Gollum visits Shelob, but seeing Frodo asleep nearly repents.
Denethor sends Faramir to Osgiliath. Aragorn reaches Linhir and
crosses into Lebennin. Eastern Rohan is invaded from the north.
First assault on Lórien.
Gollum leads Frodo into Shelob’s lair. Faramir retreats to the Causeway Forts. Théoden camps under Min-Rimmon. Aragorn drives the
enemy towards Pelargir. The Ents defeat the invaders of Rohan.
Frodo captured by the Orcs of Cirith Ungol. The Pelennor is overrun. Faramir is wounded. Aragorn reaches Pelargir and captures
the ﬂeet. Théoden in Drúadan Forest.
Samwise ﬁnds Frodo in the Tower. Minas Tirith is besieged. The
Rohirrim led by the Wild Men come to the Grey Wood.
In the early hours the Witch-king breaks the Gates of the City.
Denethor burns himself on a pyre. The horns of the Rohirrim are
heard at cockcrow. Battle of the Pelennor. Théoden is slain.

1096

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

September 6. They halt in sight of the Mountains of Moria.
13. Celeborn and Galadriel depart, the others set out for Rivendell.
21. They return to Rivendell.
22. The hundred and twenty-ninth birthday of Bilbo. Saruman comes
to the Shire.
October 5. Gandalf and the Hobbits leave Rivendell.
6. They cross the Ford of Bruinen; Frodo feels the ﬁrst return of pain.
28. They reach Bree at nightfall.
30. They leave Bree. The ‘Travellers’ come to the Brandywine Bridge
at dark.
November 1. They are arrested at Frogmorton.
2. They come to Bywater and rouse the Shire-folk.
3. Battle of Bywater, and Passing of Saruman. End of the War of the
Ring.
3020
S.R. 1420: The Great Year of Plenty
March 13. Frodo is taken ill (on the anniversary of his poisoning by
Shelob).
April 6. The mallorn ﬂowers in the Party Field.
May 1. Samwise marries Rose.
Mid-year’s Day. Frodo resigns ofﬁce of mayor, and Will Whitfoot is
restored.
September 22. Bilbo’s hundred and thirtieth birthday.
October 6. Frodo is again ill.
3021
S.R. 1421: The Last of the Third Age
March 13. Frodo is again ill.
25. Birth of Elanor the Fair,1 daughter of Samwise. On this day the
Fourth Age began in the reckoning of Gondor.
September 21. Frodo and Samwise set out from Hobbiton.
22. They meet the Last Riding of the Keepers of the Rings in Woody
End.
29. They come to the Grey Havens. Frodo and Bilbo depart over Sea
with the Three Keepers. The end of the Third Age.
October 6. Samwise returns to Bag End.
later events concerning the members
of the fellowship of the ring
s.r.
1422 With the beginning of this year the Fourth Age began in the count
1
She became known as ‘the Fair’ because of her beauty; many said that she looked
more like an elf-maid than a hobbit. She had golden hair, which had been very rare
in the Shire; but two others of Samwise’s daughters were also golden-haired, and so
were many of the children born at this time.

APPENDIX F

1133

Gimli’s own name, however, and the names of all his kin, are of Northern
(Mannish) origin. Their own secret and ‘inner’ names, their true names, the
Dwarves have never revealed to anyone of alien race. Not even on their
tombs do they inscribe them.

II
ON TRANSLATION
In presenting the matter of the Red Book, as a history for people of today
to read, the whole of the linguistic setting has been translated as far as possible
into terms of our own times. Only the languages alien to the Common Speech
have been left in their original form; but these appear mainly in the names
of persons and places.
The Common Speech, as the language of the Hobbits and their narratives,
has inevitably been turned into modern English. In the process the difference
between the varieties observable in the use of the Westron has been lessened.
Some attempt has been made to represent varieties by variations in the kind
of English used; but the divergence between the pronunciation and idiom
of the Shire and the Westron tongue in the mouths of the Elves or of the
high men of Gondor was greater than has been shown in this book. Hobbits
indeed spoke for the most part a rustic dialect, whereas in Gondor and Rohan
a more antique language was used, more formal and more terse.
One point in the divergence may here be noted, since, though important,
it has proved impossible to represent. The Westron tongue made in the
pronouns of the second person (and often also in those of the third) a
distinction, independent of number, between ‘familiar’ and ‘deferential’
forms. It was, however, one of the peculiarities of Shire-usage that the deferential forms had gone out of colloquial use. They lingered only among the
villagers, especially of the Westfarthing, who used them as endearments.
This was one of the things referred to when people of Gondor spoke of the
strangeness of Hobbit-speech. Peregrin Took, for instance, in his ﬁrst few
days in Minas Tirith used the familiar for people of all ranks, including the
Lord Denethor himself. This may have amused the aged Steward, but it
must have astonished his servants. No doubt this free use of the familiar
forms helped to spread the popular rumour that Peregrin was a person of
very high rank in his own country.1
It will be noticed that Hobbits such as Frodo, and other persons such as
Gandalf and Aragorn, do not always use the same style. This is intentional.
The more learned and able among the Hobbits had some knowledge of
‘book-language’, as it was termed in the Shire; and they were quick to note
and adopt the style of those whom they met. It was in any case natural for
much-travelled folk to speak more or less after the manner of those among
1

In one or two places an attempt has been made to hint at these distinctions by an
inconsistent use of thou. Since this pronoun is now unusual and archaic it is employed
mainly to represent the use of ceremonious language; but a change from you to thou,
thee is sometimes meant to show, there being no other means of doing this, a signiﬁcant
change from the deferential, or between men and women normal, forms to the familiar.

