240

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

ever come hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.’
He then pointed out and named those whom Frodo had not met
before. There was a younger dwarf at Glóin’s side: his son Gimli.
Beside Glorﬁndel there were several other counsellors of Elrond’s
household, of whom Erestor was the chief; and with him was Galdor,
an Elf from the Grey Havens who had come on an errand from
Cı́rdan the Shipwright. There was also a strange Elf clad in green
and brown, Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil, the
King of the Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart
was a tall man with a fair and noble face, dark-haired and grey-eyed,
proud and stern of glance.
He was cloaked and booted as if for a journey on horseback; and
indeed though his garments were rich, and his cloak was lined with
fur, they were stained with long travel. He had a collar of silver in
which a single white stone was set; his locks were shorn about his
shoulders. On a baldric he wore a great horn tipped with silver that
now was laid upon his knees. He gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with
sudden wonder.
‘Here,’ said Elrond, turning to Gandalf, ‘is Boromir, a man from
the South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I
have bidden him to be present, for here his questions will be
answered.’
Not all that was spoken and debated in the Council need now be
told. Much was said of events in the world outside, especially in the
South, and in the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things
Frodo had already heard many rumours; but the tale of Glóin was
new to him, and when the dwarf spoke he listened attentively. It
appeared that amid the splendour of their works of hand the hearts
of the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain were troubled.
‘It is now many years ago,’ said Glóin, ‘that a shadow of disquiet
fell upon our people. Whence it came we did not at ﬁrst perceive.
Words began to be whispered in secret: it was said that we were
hemmed in a narrow place, and that greater wealth and splendour
would be found in a wider world. Some spoke of Moria: the mighty
works of our fathers that are called in our own tongue Khazad-dûm;
and they declared that now at last we had the power and numbers
to return.’
Glóin sighed. ‘Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too
deep we delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long have its vast
mansions lain empty since the children of Durin ﬂed. But now we
spoke of it again with longing, and yet with dread; for no dwarf has
dared to pass the doors of Khazad-dûm for many lives of kings, save
Thrór only, and he perished. At last, however, Balin listened to the

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

255

All sat silent for a while, until at length Boromir spoke. ‘He is a
small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What
became of him? To what doom did you put him?’
‘He is in prison, but no worse,’ said Aragorn. ‘He had suffered
much. There is no doubt that he was tormented, and the fear of
Sauron lies black on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely
kept by the watchful Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and
gives him a strength hardly to be believed in one so lean and withered.
He could work much mischief still, if he were free. And I do not
doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some evil errand.’
‘Alas! alas!’ cried Legolas, and in his fair Elvish face there was
great distress. ‘The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told.
They are not good, but only here have I learned how evil they may
seem to this company. Sméagol, who is now called Gollum, has
escaped.’
‘Escaped?’ cried Aragorn. ‘That is ill news indeed. We shall all
rue it bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their
trust?’
‘Not through lack of watchfulness,’ said Legolas; ‘but perhaps
through over-kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from
others, and that more is known of our doings than we could wish.
We guarded this creature day and night, at Gandalf ’s bidding, much
though we wearied of the task. But Gandalf bade us hope still for
his cure, and we had not the heart to keep him ever in dungeons
under the earth, where he would fall back into his old black
thoughts.’
‘You were less tender to me,’ said Glóin with a ﬂash of his eyes,
as old memories were stirred of his imprisonment in the deep places
of the Elven-king’s halls.
‘Now come!’ said Gandalf. ‘Pray, do not interrupt, my good Glóin.
That was a regrettable misunderstanding, long set right. If all the
grievances that stand between Elves and Dwarves are to be brought
up here, we may as well abandon this Council.’
Glóin rose and bowed, and Legolas continued. ‘In the days of fair
weather we led Gollum through the woods; and there was a high tree
standing alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we
let him mount up to the highest branches, until he felt the free wind;
but we set a guard at the tree’s foot. One day he refused to come
down, and the guards had no mind to climb after him: he had learned
the trick of clinging to boughs with his feet as well as with his hands;
so they sat by the tree far into the night.
‘It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that
Orcs came on us at unawares. We drove them off after some time;
they were many and ﬁerce, but they came from over the mountains,

Chapter 3
THE RING GOES SOUTH
Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo’s
room. Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam
had crept into the Council, and had been chosen as Frodo’s companion.
‘It’s most unfair,’ said Pippin. ‘Instead of throwing him out, and
clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!’
‘Rewards!’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t imagine a more severe punishment.
You are not thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this
hopeless journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was
done, and I could rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.’
‘I don’t wonder,’ said Merry, ‘and I wish you could. But we are
envying Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment
for any of us to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a
long way with you and been through some stiff times. We want to
go on.’
‘That’s what I meant,’ said Pippin. ‘We hobbits ought to stick
together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me up. There
must be someone with intelligence in the party.’
‘Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!’ said
Gandalf, looking in through the window, which was near the ground.
‘But you are all worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided
yet.’
‘Nothing decided!’ cried Pippin. ‘Then what were you all doing?
You were shut up for hours.’
‘Talking,’ said Bilbo. ‘There was a deal of talk, and everyone had
an eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas’s bit of news about
Gollum caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.’
‘You were wrong,’ said Gandalf. ‘You were inattentive. I had
already heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real
eye-openers, as you put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only
one that was not surprised.’
‘Well, anyway,’ said Bilbo, ‘nothing was decided beyond choosing
poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to
that, if I was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair
number, when the reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf ?’
‘Yes,’ said the wizard. ‘Some of the scouts have been sent out
already. More will go tomorrow. Elrond is sending Elves, and they
will get in touch with the Rangers, and maybe with Thranduil’s folk

THE RING GOES SOUTH

275

the black horses had been found at once drowned in the ﬂooded
Ford. On the rocks of the rapids below it searchers discovered the
bodies of ﬁve more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and tattered.
Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the
North.
‘Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,’ said Gandalf.
‘It is rash to be too sure, yet I think that we may hope now that the
Ringwraiths were scattered, and have been obliged to return as best
they could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.
‘If that is so, it will be some time before they can begin the hunt
again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to
journey all the way to the borders of Rivendell before they can pick
up our trail. And if we are careful that will be hard to ﬁnd. But we
must delay no longer.’
Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely at Frodo.
‘The time has come,’ he said. ‘If the Ring is to set out, it must go
soon. But those who go with it must not count on their errand being
aided by war or force. They must pass into the domain of the Enemy
far from aid. Do you still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be
the Ring-bearer?’
‘I do,’ said Frodo. ‘I will go with Sam.’
‘Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,’ said
Elrond. ‘I can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is
to be achieved I do not know. The Shadow has crept now to the feet
of the Mountains, and draws nigh even to the borders of the Greyﬂood; and under the Shadow all is dark to me. You will meet many
foes, some open, and some disguised; and you may ﬁnd friends upon
your way when you least look for it. I will send out messages, such
as I can contrive, to those whom I know in the wide world; but so
perilous are the lands now become that some may well miscarry, or
come no quicker than you yourself.
‘And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far as
they will or fortune allows. The number must be few, since your
hope is in speed and secrecy. Had I a host of Elves in armour of
the Elder Days, it would avail little, save to arouse the power of
Mordor.
‘The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine Walkers
shall be set against the Nine Riders that are evil. With you and your
faithful servant, Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great task, and
maybe the end of his labours.
‘For the rest, they shall represent the other Free Peoples of the
World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be for the Elves; and

THE RING GOES SOUTH

279

I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of people long ago,
and people who will see a world
that I shall never know.
But all the while I sit and think
of times there were before,
I listen for returning feet
and voices at the door.
It was a cold grey day near the end of December. The East Wind
was streaming through the bare branches of the trees, and seething
in the dark pines on the hills. Ragged clouds were hurrying overhead,
dark and low. As the cheerless shadows of the early evening began
to fall the Company made ready to set out. They were to start at
dusk, for Elrond counselled them to journey under cover of night as
often as they could, until they were far from Rivendell.
‘You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,’ he said.
‘I do not doubt that news of the discomﬁture of the Riders has already
reached him, and he will be ﬁlled with wrath. Soon now his spies on
foot and wing will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the sky
above you must beware as you go on your way.’
The Company took little gear of war, for their hope was in secrecy
not in battle. Aragorn had Andúril but no other weapon, and he went
forth clad only in rusty green and brown, as a Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a long sword, in fashion like Andúril but of less
lineage, and he bore also a shield and his war-horn.
‘Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,’ he said, ‘and
then let all the foes of Gondor ﬂee!’ Putting it to his lips he blew a
blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that
voice in Rivendell sprang to their feet.
‘Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir,’ said
Elrond, ‘until you stand once more on the borders of your land, and
dire need is on you.’
‘Maybe,’ said Boromir. ‘But always I have let my horn cry at
setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I
will not go forth as a thief in the night.’
Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-rings, for
dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed
axe. Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white
knife. The younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from
the barrow; but Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo
wished, remained hidden. Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side

280

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was the elven-sword Glamdring, the mate of Orcrist that lay now
upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain.
All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and
they had jackets and cloaks lined with fur. Spare food and clothes
and blankets and other needs were laden on a pony, none other than
the poor beast that they had brought from Bree.
The stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change on
him: he was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth. It was
Sam who had insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he
called him) would pine, if he did not come.
‘That animal can nearly talk,’ he said, ‘and would talk, if he stayed
here much longer. He gave me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could
speak it: if you don’t let me go with you, Sam, I’ll follow on my
own.’ So Bill was going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only
member of the Company that did not seem depressed.
Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the ﬁre, and they
were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the
house. A gleam of ﬁrelight came from the open doors, and soft lights
were glowing in many windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent
on the doorstep beside Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to
his knees; only Elrond knew fully what this hour meant to him. The
others could be seen as grey shapes in the darkness.
Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and staring
moodily into the gloom where the river roared stonily below; his
desire for adventure was at its lowest ebb.
‘Bill, my lad,’ he said, ‘you oughtn’t to have took up with us. You
could have stayed here and et the best hay till the new grass comes.’
Bill swished his tail and said nothing.
Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in
his mind all the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had
forgotten anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little
box of salt that he always carried and reﬁlled when he could; a good
supply of pipe-weed (but not near enough, I’ll warrant); ﬂint and
tinder; woollen hose; linen; various small belongings of his master’s
that Frodo had forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in
triumph when they were called for. He went through them all.
‘Rope!’ he muttered. ‘No rope! And only last night you said to
yourself: ‘‘Sam, what about a bit of rope? You’ll want it, if you haven’t
got it.’’ Well, I’ll want it. I can’t get it now.’
At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he called the
Company to him. ‘This is my last word,’ he said in a low voice. ‘The
Ring-bearer is setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom. On him

THE RING GOES SOUTH

281

alone is any charge laid: neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver
it to any servant of the Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save
members of the Company and the Council, and only then in gravest
need. The others go with him as free companions, to help him on
his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside into other paths,
as chance allows. The further you go, the less easy will it be to
withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further than you
will. For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you
cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.’
‘Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,’ said
Gimli.
‘Maybe,’ said Elrond, ‘but let him not vow to walk in the dark,
who has not seen the nightfall.’
‘Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,’ said Gimli.
‘Or break it,’ said Elrond. ‘Look not too far ahead! But go now
with good hearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves and Men
and all Free Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!’
‘Good ... good luck!’ cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. ‘I don’t
suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall
expect a full account when you get back. And don’t be too long!
Farewell!’
Many others of Elrond’s household stood in the shadows and
watched them go, bidding them farewell with soft voices. There was
no laughter, and no song or music. At last they turned away and
faded silently into the dusk.
They crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths
that led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length
to the high moor where the wind hissed through the heather. Then
with one glance at the Last Homely House twinkling below them
they strode away far into the night.
At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards
went on by narrow paths among the folded lands. Their purpose was
to hold this course west of the Mountains for many miles and days.
The country was much rougher and more barren than in the green
vale of the Great River in Wilderland on the other side of the range,
and their going would be slow; but they hoped in this way to escape
the notice of unfriendly eyes. The spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom
been seen in this empty country, and the paths were little known
except to the people of Rivendell.
Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew
this land even in the dark. The others were in ﬁle behind, and Legolas
whose eyes were keen was the rearguard. The ﬁrst part of their journey

282

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was hard and dreary, and Frodo remembered little of it, save the
wind. For many sunless days an icy blast came from the Mountains
in the east, and no garment seemed able to keep out its searching
ﬁngers. Though the Company was well clad, they seldom felt warm,
either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during the middle of
the day, in some hollow of the land, or hidden under the tangled
thorn-bushes that grew in thickets in many places. In the late afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold
and cheerless as a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a
ﬁre. In the evening they went on again, always as nearly southward
as they could ﬁnd a way.
At ﬁrst it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked and
stumbled until they were weary, they were creeping forward like
snails, and getting nowhere. Each day the land looked much the same
as it had the day before. Yet steadily the mountains were drawing
nearer. South of Rivendell they rose ever higher, and bent westwards;
and about the feet of the main range there was tumbled an ever wider
land of bleak hills, and deep valleys ﬁlled with turbulent waters. Paths
were few and winding, and led them often only to the edge of some
sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.
They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed.
The wind suddenly fell and then veered round to the south. The
swift-ﬂowing clouds lifted and melted away, and the sun came out,
pale and bright. There came a cold clear dawn at the end of a long
stumbling night-march. The travellers reached a low ridge crowned
with ancient holly-trees whose grey-green trunks seemed to have been
built out of the very stone of the hills. Their dark leaves shone and
their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.
Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty mountains that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company
was taking. At the left of this high range rose three peaks; the tallest
and nearest stood up like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare,
northern precipice was still largely in the shadow, but where the
sunlight slanted upon it, it glowed red.
Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his hand. ‘We
have done well,’ he said. ‘We have reached the borders of the country
that Men call Hollin; many Elves lived here in happier days, when
Eregion was its name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow ﬂies we
have come, though many long miles further our feet have walked.
The land and the weather will be milder now, but perhaps all the
more dangerous.’
‘Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said Frodo,
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face.

THE RING GOES SOUTH

283

‘But the mountains are ahead of us,’ said Pippin. ‘We must have
turned eastwards in the night.’
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you see further ahead in the clear light.
Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west. There are
many maps in Elrond’s house, but I suppose you never thought to
look at them?’
‘Yes I did, sometimes,’ said Pippin, ‘but I don’t remember them.
Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing.’
‘I need no map,’ said Gimli, who had come up with Legolas, and
was gazing out before him with a strange light in his deep eyes. ‘There
is the land where our fathers worked of old, and we have wrought
the image of those mountains into many works of metal and of stone,
and into many songs and tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz,
Zirak, Shathûr.
‘Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but
I know them and their names, for under them lies Khazad-dûm, the
Dwarrowdelf, that is now called the Black Pit, Moria in the Elvish
tongue. Yonder stands Barazinbar, the Redhorn, cruel Caradhras;
and beyond him are Silvertine and Cloudyhead: Celebdil the White,
and Fanuidhol the Grey, that we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathûr.
‘There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their arms lies
the deep-shadowed valley which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the
Dimrill Dale, which the Elves call Nanduhirion.’
‘It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,’ said Gandalf. ‘If
we climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under the far side
of Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep
vale of the Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River
Silverlode rises in its icy springs.’
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram,’ said Gimli, ‘and cold are the
springs of Kibil-nâla. My heart trembles at the thought that I may
see them soon.’
‘May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf !’ said Gandalf.
‘But whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We
must go down the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the
Great River, and then——’
He paused.
‘Yes, and where then?’ asked Merry.
‘To the end of the journey – in the end,’ said Gandalf. ‘We cannot
look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the ﬁrst stage is safely over.
I think we will rest here, not only today but tonight as well. There
is a wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country
before it wholly forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.’
‘That is true,’ said Legolas. ‘But the Elves of this land were of a
race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do

284

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

not now remember them. Only I hear the stones lament them: deep
they delved us, fair they wrought us, high they builded us; but they are
gone. They are gone. They sought the Havens long ago.’
That morning they lit a ﬁre in a deep hollow shrouded by great
bushes of holly, and their supper-breakfast was merrier than it had
been since they set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for
they expected to have all the night to sleep in, and they did not mean
to go on again until the evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was
silent and restless. After a while he left the Company and wandered
on to the ridge; there he stood in the shadow of a tree, looking out
southwards and westwards, with his head posed as if he was listening.
Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked down at the
others laughing and talking.
‘What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called up. ‘What are you
looking for? Do you miss the East Wind?’
‘No indeed,’ he answered. ‘But I miss something. I have been in
the country of Hollin in many seasons. No folk dwell here now, but
many other creatures live here at all times, especially birds. Yet now
all things but you are silent. I can feel it. There is no sound for miles
about us, and your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not
understand it.’
Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. ‘But what do you guess
is the reason?’ he asked. ‘Is there more in it than surprise at seeing
four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where people are so
seldom seen or heard?’
‘I hope that is it,’ answered Aragorn. ‘But I have a sense of watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.’
‘Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you bring a
Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if the
Ranger is Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set
the watch.’
It was Sam’s turn that day to take the ﬁrst watch, but Aragorn
joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even
Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The
swish of the pony’s tail and the occasional movements of his feet
became loud noises. Sam could hear his own joints creaking, if he
stirred. Dead silence was around him, and over all hung a clear blue
sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. Away in the South a dark
patch appeared, and grew, and drove north like ﬂying smoke in the
wind.
‘What’s that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud,’ said Sam in a
whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intently at the

THE RING GOES SOUTH

285

sky; but before long Sam could see for himself what was approaching.
Flocks of birds, ﬂying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and
traversing all the land as if they were searching for something; and
they were steadily drawing nearer.
‘Lie ﬂat and still!’ hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the
shade of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away
suddenly from the main host, and came, ﬂying low, straight towards
the ridge. Sam thought they were a kind of crow of large size. As
they passed overhead, in so dense a throng that their shadow followed
them darkly over the ground below, one harsh croak was heard.
Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and west,
and the sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then he sprang up
and went and wakened Gandalf.
‘Regiments of black crows are ﬂying over all the land between the
Mountains and the Greyﬂood,’ he said, ‘and they have passed over
Hollin. They are not natives here; they are crebain out of Fangorn
and Dunland. I do not know what they are about: possibly there is
some trouble away south from which they are ﬂeeing; but I think
they are spying out the land. I have also glimpsed many hawks ﬂying
high up in the sky. I think we ought to move again this evening.
Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.’
‘And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,’ said Gandalf; ‘and how
we can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we
will think of that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark,
I am afraid that you are right.’
‘Luckily our ﬁre made little smoke, and had burned low before
the crebain came,’ said Aragorn. ‘It must be put out and not lit again.’
‘Well if that isn’t a plague and a nuisance!’ said Pippin. The news:
no ﬁre, and a move again by night, had been broken to him, as soon
as he woke in the late afternoon. ‘All because of a pack of crows!
I had looked forward to a real good meal tonight: something hot.’
‘Well, you can go on looking forward,’ said Gandalf. ‘There may
be many unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like
a pipe to smoke in comfort, and warmer feet. However, we are certain
of one thing at any rate: it will get warmer as we get south.’
‘Too warm, I shouldn’t wonder,’ muttered Sam to Frodo. ‘But
I’m beginning to think it’s time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain,
and saw the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at ﬁrst that this
here Redhorn, or whatever its name is, might be it, till Gimli spoke
his piece. A fair jaw-cracker dwarf-language must be!’ Maps conveyed
nothing to Sam’s mind, and all distances in these strange lands
seemed so vast that he was quite out of his reckoning.
All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds

286

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

passed over now and again; but as the westering Sun grew red they
disappeared southwards. At dusk the Company set out, and turning
now half east they steered their course towards Caradhras, which far
away still glowed faintly red in the last light of the vanished Sun.
One by one white stars sprang forth as the sky faded.
Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo
like the remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and
well planned, from Hollin to the mountain-pass. The Moon, now at
the full, rose over the mountains, and cast a pale light in which the
shadows of stones were black. Many of them looked to have been
worked by hands, though now they lay tumbled and ruinous in a
bleak, barren land.
It was the cold chill hour before the ﬁrst stir of dawn, and the
moon was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly he saw or felt
a shadow pass over the high stars, as if for a moment they faded and
then ﬂashed out again. He shivered.
‘Did you see anything pass over?’ he whispered to Gandalf, who
was just ahead.
‘No, but I felt it, whatever it was,’ he answered. ‘It may be nothing,
only a wisp of thin cloud.’
‘It was moving fast then,’ muttered Aragorn, ‘and not with the
wind.’
Nothing further happened that night. The next morning dawned
even brighter than before. But the air was chill again; already the
wind was turning back towards the east. For two more nights they
marched on, climbing steadily but ever more slowly as their road
wound up into the hills, and the mountains towered up, nearer and
nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose before them, a mighty
peak, tipped with snow like silver, but with sheer naked sides, dull
red as if stained with blood.
There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan. The wind
had gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and
looked back.
‘Winter deepens behind us,’ he said quietly to Aragorn. ‘The
heights away north are whiter than they were; snow is lying far down
their shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up towards the
Redhorn Gate. We may well be seen by watchers on that narrow
path, and waylaid by some evil; but the weather may prove a more
deadly enemy than any. What do you think of your course now,
Aragorn?’
Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and
Aragorn were continuing some debate that had begun long before.
He listened anxiously.

THE RING GOES SOUTH

287

‘I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know
well, Gandalf,’ answered Aragorn. ‘And perils known and unknown
will grow as we go on. But we must go on; and it is no good our
delaying the passage of the mountains. Further south there are no
passes, till one comes to the Gap of Rohan. I do not trust that way
since your news of Saruman. Who knows which side now the marshals
of the Horse-lords serve?’
‘Who knows indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is another way, and
not by the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have
spoken of.’
‘But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others,
I beg, not until it is plain that there is no other way.’
‘We must decide before we go further,’ answered Gandalf.
‘Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest
and sleep,’ said Aragorn.
In the late afternoon, while the others were ﬁnishing their breakfast, Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at
Caradhras. Its sides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in
grey cloud. Frodo watched them, wondering which way the debate
would go. When they returned to the Company Gandalf spoke, and
then he knew that it had been decided to face the weather and the
high pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was the other
dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to ﬁll
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been
abandoned.
‘From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ‘I fear that
the Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the
weather that is coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go
with all the speed that we can. Even so it will take us more than two
marches before we reach the top of the pass. Dark will come early
this evening. We must leave as soon as you can get ready.’
‘I will add a word of advice, if I may,’ said Boromir. ‘I was born
under the shadow of the White Mountains and know something of
journeys in the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse,
before we come down on the other side. It will not help us to keep
so secret that we are frozen to death. When we leave here, where
there are still a few trees and bushes, each of us should carry a faggot
of wood, as large as he can bear.’
‘And Bill could take a bit more, couldn’t you, lad?’ said Sam. The
pony looked at him mournfully.
‘Very well,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we must not use the wood – not
unless it is a choice between ﬁre and death.’
*
*
*

288

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The Company set out again, with good speed at ﬁrst; but soon
their way became steep and difﬁcult. The twisting and climbing road
had in many places almost disappeared, and was blocked with many
fallen stones. The night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A bitter
wind swirled among the rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the
knees of the great mountains. The narrow path now wound under a
sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which the grim ﬂanks of Caradhras
towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right was a gulf of darkness
where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine.
Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a moment
at the top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm
and saw the dim white ﬂakes of snow settling on his sleeve.
They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, ﬁlling all
the air, and swirling into Frodo’s eyes. The dark bent shapes of
Gandalf and Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen.
‘I don’t like this at all,’ panted Sam just behind. ‘Snow’s all right
on a ﬁne morning, but I like to be in bed while it’s falling. I wish
this lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.’
Except on the high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare
in the Shire, and was regarded as a pleasant event and a chance for
fun. No living hobbit (save Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter
of 1311, when white wolves invaded the Shire over the frozen
Brandywine.
Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; it was
already ankle-deep about his boots.
‘This is what I feared,’ he said. ‘What do you say now, Aragorn?’
‘That I feared it too,’ Aragorn answered, ‘but less than other
things. I knew the risk of snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far
south, save high up in the mountains. But we are not high yet; we
are still far down, where the paths are usually open all the winter.’
‘I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,’ said Boromir.
‘They say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains
of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange
powers and many allies.’
‘His arm has grown long indeed,’ said Gimli, ‘if he can draw snow
down from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.’
‘His arm has grown long,’ said Gandalf.
While they were halted, the wind died down, and the snow slackened until it almost ceased. They tramped on again. But they had
not gone more than a furlong when the storm returned with fresh
fury. The wind whistled and the snow became a blinding blizzard.
Soon even Boromir found it hard to keep going. The hobbits, bent
nearly double, toiled along behind the taller folk, but it was plain

THE RING GOES SOUTH

289

that they could not go much further, if the snow continued. Frodo’s
feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even Gimli, as stout
as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged.
The Company halted suddenly, as if they had come to an agreement without any words being spoken. They heard eerie noises in
the darkness round them. It may have been only a trick of the wind
in the cracks and gullies of the rocky wall, but the sounds were those
of shrill cries, and wild howls of laughter. Stones began to fall from
the mountain-side, whistling over their heads, or crashing on the path
beside them. Every now and again they heard a dull rumble, as a
great boulder rolled down from hidden heights above.
‘We cannot go further tonight,’ said Boromir. ‘Let those call it the
wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are
aimed at us.’
‘I do call it the wind,’ said Aragorn. ‘But that does not make what
you say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the
world that have little love for those that go on two legs, and yet are
not in league with Sauron, but have purposes of their own. Some
have been in this world longer than he.’
‘Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name,’ said Gimli,
‘long years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these
lands.’
‘It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his attack,’
said Gandalf.
‘But what can we do?’ cried Pippin miserably. He was leaning on
Merry and Frodo, and he was shivering.
‘Either stop where we are, or go back,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is no good
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this path leaves
the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long
hard slope. We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones –
or anything else.’
‘And it is no good going back while the storm holds,’ said Aragorn.
‘We have passed no place on the way up that offered more shelter
than this cliff-wall we are under now.’
‘Shelter!’ muttered Sam. ‘If this is shelter, then one wall and no
roof make a house.’
The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff as they
could. It faced southwards, and near the bottom it leaned out a little,
so that they hoped it would give them some protection from the
northerly wind and from the falling stones. But eddying blasts swirled
round them from every side, and the snow ﬂowed down in ever
denser clouds.
They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony

290

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

stood patiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits, and screened
them a little; but before long the drifting snow was above his hocks,
and it went on mounting. If they had had no larger companions the
hobbits would soon have been entirely buried.
A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast
into a warm and hazy dream. He thought a ﬁre was heating his toes,
and out of the shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo’s
voice speaking. I don’t think much of your diary, he said. Snowstorms on
January the twelfth: there was no need to come back to report that!
But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an effort,
when he felt himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.
‘This will be the death of the halﬂings, Gandalf,’ said Boromir.
‘It is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads. We must
do something to save ourselves.’
‘Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing
out a leathern ﬂask. ‘Just a mouthful each – for all of us. It is very
precious. It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me
at our parting. Pass it round!’
As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant
liquor he felt a new strength of heart, and the heavy drowsiness left
his limbs. The others also revived and found fresh hope and vigour.
But the snow did not relent. It whirled about them thicker than ever,
and the wind blew louder.
‘What do you say to ﬁre?’ asked Boromir suddenly. ‘The choice
seems near now between ﬁre and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall
be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us,
but that will not help us.’
‘You may make a ﬁre, if you can,’ answered Gandalf. ‘If there are
any watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, ﬁre
or no.’
But though they had brought wood and kindlings by the advice
of Boromir, it passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a ﬂame
that would hold amid the swirling wind or catch in the wet fuel. At
last reluctantly Gandalf himself took a hand. Picking up a faggot he
held it aloft for a moment, and then with a word of command, naur
an edraith ammen! he thrust the end of his staff into the midst of it.
At once a great spout of green and blue ﬂame sprang out, and the
wood ﬂared and sputtered.
‘If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,’ he
said. ‘I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can read from
Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.’
But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly eyes.
Their hearts were rejoiced to see the light of the ﬁre. The wood

THE RING GOES SOUTH

291

burned merrily; and though all round it the snow hissed, and pools
of slush crept under their feet, they warmed their hands gladly at the
blaze. There they stood, stooping in a circle round the little dancing
and blowing ﬂames. A red light was on their tired and anxious faces;
behind them the night was like a black wall.
But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell.
The ﬁre burned low, and the last faggot was thrown on.
‘The night is getting old,’ said Aragorn. ‘The dawn is not far off.’
‘If any dawn can pierce these clouds,’ said Gimli.
Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the blackness.
‘The snow is growing less,’ he said, ‘and the wind is quieter.’
Frodo gazed wearily at the ﬂakes still falling out of the dark to be
revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying ﬁre; but for a
long time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly,
as sleep was beginning to creep over him again, he was aware that
the wind had indeed fallen, and the ﬂakes were becoming larger and
fewer. Very slowly a dim light began to grow. At last the snow stopped
altogether.
As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded world.
Below their refuge were white humps and domes and shapeless deeps
beneath which the path that they had trodden was altogether lost;
but the heights above were hidden in great clouds still heavy with
the threat of snow.
Gimli looked up and shook his head. ‘Caradhras has not forgiven
us,’ he said. ‘He has more snow yet to ﬂing at us, if we go on. The
sooner we go back and down the better.’
To this all agreed, but their retreat was now difﬁcult. It might well
prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their ﬁre the
snow lay many feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in
places it had been scooped and piled by the wind into great drifts
against the cliff.
‘If Gandalf would go before us with a bright ﬂame, he might melt
a path for you,’ said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and
he alone of the Company remained still light of heart.
‘If Elves could ﬂy over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to
save us,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I must have something to work on.
I cannot burn snow.’
‘Well,’ said Boromir, ‘when heads are at a loss bodies must serve,
as we say in my country. The strongest of us must seek a way. See!
Though all is now snow-clad, our path, as we came up, turned about
that shoulder of rock down yonder. It was there that the snow ﬁrst
began to burden us. If we could reach that point, maybe it would
prove easier beyond. It is no more than a furlong off, I guess.’

292

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Then let us force a path thither, you and I!’ said Aragorn.
Aragorn was the tallest of the Company, but Boromir, little less
in height, was broader and heavier in build. He led the way, and
Aragorn followed him. Slowly they moved off, and were soon toiling
heavily. In places the snow was breast-high, and often Boromir
seemed to be swimming or burrowing with his great arms rather than
walking.
Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his lips, and
then he turned to the others. ‘The strongest must seek a way, say
you? But I say: let a ploughman plough, but choose an otter for
swimming, and for running light over grass and leaf, or over snow –
an Elf.’
With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed as if
for the ﬁrst time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no
boots, but wore only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made
little imprint in the snow.
‘Farewell!’ he said to Gandalf. ‘I go to ﬁnd the Sun!’ Then swift
as a runner over ﬁrm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the
toiling men, with a wave of his hand he passed them, and sped into
the distance, and vanished round the rocky turn.
The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and
Aragorn dwindled into black specks in the whiteness. At length they
too passed from sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered,
and now a few ﬂakes of snow came curling down again.
An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer, and then
at last they saw Legolas coming back. At the same time Boromir
and Aragorn reappeared round the bend far behind him and came
labouring up the slope.
‘Well,’ cried Legolas as he ran up, ‘I have not brought the Sun.
She is walking in the blue ﬁelds of the South, and a little wreath of
snow on this Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have
brought back a gleam of good hope for those who are doomed to go
on feet. There is the greatest wind-drift of all just beyond the turn,
and there our Strong Men were almost buried. They despaired, until
I returned and told them that the drift was little wider than a wall.
And on the other side the snow suddenly grows less, while further
down it is no more than a white coverlet to cool a hobbit’s toes.’
‘Ah, it is as I said,’ growled Gimli. ‘It was no ordinary storm. It
is the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and
that drift was laid to cut off our escape.’
‘But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with
you,’ said Boromir, who came up at that moment. ‘And doughty
Men too, if I may say it; though lesser men with spades might have

THE RING GOES SOUTH

293

served you better. Still, we have thrust a lane through the drift; and
for that all here may be grateful who cannot run as light as Elves.’
‘But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through
the drift?’ said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.
‘Have hope!’ said Boromir. ‘I am weary, but I still have some
strength left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others
no doubt will make shift to tread the path behind us. Come, Master
Peregrin! I will begin with you.’
He lifted up the hobbit. ‘Cling to my back! I shall need my arms,’
he said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin
marvelled at his strength, seeing the passage that he had already
forced with no other tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened
as he was, he was widening the track for those who followed, thrusting
the snow aside as he went.
They came at length to the great drift. It was ﬂung across the
mountain-path like a sheer and sudden wall, and its crest, sharp as
if shaped with knives, reared up more than twice the height of Boromir; but through the middle a passage had been beaten, rising and
falling like a bridge. On the far side Merry and Pippin were set down,
and there they waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to
arrive.
After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in the narrow
but now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli
perched among the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo.
They passed through the lane; but hardly had Frodo touched the
ground when with a deep rumble there rolled down a fall of stones
and slithering snow. The spray of it half blinded the Company as
they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again they
saw that the path was blocked behind them.
‘Enough, enough!’ cried Gimli. ‘We are departing as quickly as
we may!’ And indeed with that last stroke the malice of the mountain
seemed to be expended, as if Caradhras was satisﬁed that the invaders
had been beaten off and would not dare to return. The threat of
snow lifted; the clouds began to break and the light grew broader.
As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow became steadily
more shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could
trudge along. Soon they all stood once more on the ﬂat shelf at the
head of the steep slope where they had felt the ﬁrst ﬂakes of snow
the night before.
The morning was now far advanced. From the high place they
looked back westwards over the lower lands. Far away in the tumble
of country that lay at the foot of the mountain was the dell from
which they had started to climb the pass.
Frodo’s legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and

294

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

his head was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march
downhill. Black specks swam before his eyes. He rubbed them, but
the black specks remained. In the distance below him, but still high
above the lower foothills, dark dots were circling in the air.
‘The birds again!’ said Aragorn, pointing down.
‘That cannot be helped now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Whether they are
good or evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down
at once. Not even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another
night-fall!’
A cold wind ﬂowed down behind them, as they turned their
backs on the Redhorn Gate, and stumbled wearily down the slope.
Caradhras had defeated them.

Chapter 4
A JOURNEY IN THE DARK
It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, when they
halted for the night. They were very weary. The mountains were
veiled in deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared
them one more mouthful each of the miruvor of Rivendell. When
they had eaten some food he called a council.
‘We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,’ he said. ‘The attack
on the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a
while.’
‘And then where are we to go?’ asked Frodo.
‘We still have our journey and our errand before us,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.’
Pippin’s face brightened visibly at the mere mention of return to
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully. But Aragorn and
Boromir made no sign. Frodo looked troubled.
‘I wish I was back there,’ he said. ‘But how can I return without
shame – unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already
defeated?’
‘You are right, Frodo,’ said Gandalf: ‘to go back is to admit defeat,
and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring
must remain there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner
or later Rivendell will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter time
it will be destroyed. The Ringwraiths are deadly enemies, but they
are only shadows yet of the power and terror they would possess if
the Ruling Ring was on their master’s hand again.’
‘Then we must go on, if there is a way,’ said Frodo with a sigh.
Sam sank back into gloom.
‘There is a way that we may attempt,’ said Gandalf. ‘I thought
from the beginning, when ﬁrst I considered this journey, that we
should try it. But it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of
it to the Company before. Aragorn was against it, until the pass over
the mountains had at least been tried.’
‘If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil
indeed,’ said Merry. ‘But you had better tell us about it, and let us
know the worst at once.’
‘The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria,’ said
Gandalf. Only Gimli lifted up his head; a smouldering ﬁre was in his
eyes. On all the others a dread fell at the mention of that name. Even
to the hobbits it was a legend of vague fear.

296

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it will
lead through Moria?’ said Aragorn darkly.
‘It is a name of ill omen,’ said Boromir. ‘Nor do I see the need
to go there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan, where men are friendly
to my people, taking the road that I followed on my way hither. Or
we might pass by and cross the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin,
and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to the sea.’
‘Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman? With him
I may have business of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must
not come near Isengard, if that can by any means be prevented. The
Gap of Rohan is closed to us while we go with the Bearer.
‘As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We might
spend a year in such a journey, and we should pass through many
lands that are empty and harbourless. Yet they would not be safe.
The watchful eyes both of Saruman and of the Enemy are on them.
When you came north, Boromir, you were in the Enemy’s eyes only
one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of small concern to
him: his mind was busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But you return
now as a member of the Ring’s Company, and you are in peril as
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase with every
league that we go south under the naked sky.
‘Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has
become more desperate, I fear. I see now little hope, if we do not
soon vanish from sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I
advise that we should go neither over the mountains, nor round them,
but under them. That is a road at any rate that the Enemy will least
expect us to take.’
‘We do not know what he expects,’ said Boromir. ‘He may watch
all roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria would be
to walk into a trap, hardly better than knocking at the gates of the
Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria is black.’
‘You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to
the stronghold of Sauron,’ answered Gandalf. ‘I alone of you have
ever been in the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in his older
and lesser dwelling in Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of
Barad-dûr do not return. But I would not lead you into Moria if
there were no hope of coming out again. If there are Orcs there, it
may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs of the Misty
Mountains were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five Armies.
The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there
is a hope that Moria is still free.
‘There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that in some

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

297

deep hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However
it may prove, one must tread the path that need chooses!’
‘I will tread the path with you, Gandalf !’ said Gimli. ‘I will go
and look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there – if you can
ﬁnd the doors that are shut.’
‘Good, Gimli!’ said Gandalf. ‘You encourage me. We will seek
the hidden doors together. And we will come through. In the ruins
of the Dwarves, a dwarf ’s head will be less easy to bewilder than
Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yet it will not be the ﬁrst time that I have
been to Moria. I sought there long for Thráin son of Thrór after he
was lost. I passed through, and I came out again alive!’
‘I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,’ said Aragorn quietly; ‘but
though I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish
to enter Moria a second time.’
‘And I don’t wish to enter it even once,’ said Pippin.
‘Nor me,’ muttered Sam.
‘Of course not!’ said Gandalf. ‘Who would? But the question is:
who will follow me, if I lead you there?’
‘I will,’ said Gimli eagerly.
‘I will,’ said Aragorn heavily. ‘You followed my lead almost to
disaster in the snow, and have said no word of blame. I will follow
your lead now – if this last warning does not move you. It is not of
the Ring, nor of us others that I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf.
And I say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware!’
‘I will not go,’ said Boromir; ‘not unless the vote of the whole
Company is against me. What do Legolas and the little folk say? The
Ring-bearer’s voice surely should be heard?’
‘I do not wish to go to Moria,’ said Legolas.
The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo
spoke. ‘I do not wish to go,’ he said; ‘but neither do I wish to refuse
the advice of Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we
have slept on it. Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the
morning than in this cold gloom. How the wind howls!’
At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the wind
hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and
wailing round them in the empty spaces of the night.
Suddenly Aragorn leapt to his feet. ‘How the wind howls!’ he
cried. ‘It is howling with wolf-voices. The Wargs have come west of
the Mountains!’
‘Need we wait until morning then?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is as I said.
The hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish
to journey south by night with the wild wolves on his trail?’
‘How far is Moria?’ asked Boromir.

298

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some ﬁfteen miles as
the crow ﬂies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,’ answered Gandalf
grimly.
‘Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,’ said
Boromir. ‘The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one
fears.’
‘True!’ said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. ‘But where
the warg howls, there also the orc prowls.’
‘I wish I had taken Elrond’s advice,’ muttered Pippin to Sam. ‘I
am no good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras
the Bullroarer in me: these howls freeze my blood. I don’t ever
remember feeling so wretched.’
‘My heart’s right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin,’ said Sam. ‘But we
aren’t etten yet, and there are some stout folk here with us. Whatever
may be in store for old Gandalf, I’ll wager it isn’t a wolf ’s belly.’
For their defence in the night the Company climbed to the top of
the small hill under which they had been sheltering. It was crowned
with a knot of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle
of boulder-stones. In the midst of this they lit a ﬁre, for there was
no hope that darkness and silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs.
Round the ﬁre they sat, and those that were not on guard dozed
uneasily. Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated where he stood.
The howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer
and sometimes further off. In the dead of night many shining eyes
were seen peering over the brow of the hill. Some advanced almost
to the ring of stones. At a gap in the circle a great dark wolf-shape
could be seen halted, gazing at them. A shuddering howl broke from
him, as if he were a captain summoning his pack to the assault.
Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft.
‘Listen, Hound of Sauron!’ he cried. ‘Gandalf is here. Fly, if you
value your foul skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come
within this ring.’
The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great leap. At
that moment there was a sharp twang. Legolas had loosed his bow.
There was a hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to the
ground; the Elvish arrow had pierced its throat. The watching eyes
were suddenly extinguished. Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward,
but the hill was deserted; the hunting packs had ﬂed. All about them
the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on the sighing wind.
The night was old, and westward the waning moon was setting,
gleaming ﬁtfully through the breaking clouds. Suddenly Frodo started

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

299

from sleep. Without warning a storm of howls broke out ﬁerce and
wild all about the camp. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently
and was now attacking them from every side at once.
‘Fling fuel on the ﬁre!’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits. ‘Draw your
blades, and stand back to back!’
In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many
grey shapes spring over the ring of stones. More and more followed.
Through the throat of one huge leader Aragorn passed his sword
with a thrust; with a great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another.
Beside them Gimli stood with his stout legs apart, wielding his dwarfaxe. The bow of Legolas was singing.
In the wavering ﬁrelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he
rose up, a great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient
king of stone set upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning
branch and strode to meet the wolves. They gave back before him.
High in the air he tossed the blazing brand. It ﬂared with a sudden
white radiance like lightning; and his voice rolled like thunder.
‘Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!’ he cried.
There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him burst into
a leaf and bloom of blinding ﬂame. The ﬁre leapt from tree-top to
tree-top. The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light. The swords
and knives of the defenders shone and ﬂickered. The last arrow of
Legolas kindled in the air as it ﬂew, and plunged burning into the
heart of a great wolf-chieftain. All the others ﬂed.
Slowly the ﬁre died till nothing was left but falling ash and sparks;
a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly
from the hill, as the ﬁrst light of dawn came dimly in the sky. Their
enemies were routed and did not return.
‘What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin?’ said Sam, sheathing his sword.
‘Wolves won’t get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake!
Nearly singed the hair off my head!’
When the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves
were to be found, and they looked in vain for the bodies of the dead.
No trace of the ﬁght remained but the charred trees and the arrows
of Legolas lying on the hill-top. All were undamaged save one of
which only the point was left.
‘It is as I feared,’ said Gandalf. ‘These were no ordinary wolves
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!’
That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the
command of some power that had no longer any use for snow, since
they had retreated from the pass, a power that wished now to have
a clear light in which things that moved in the wild could be seen
from far away. The wind had been turning through north to

300

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

north-west during the night, and now it failed. The clouds vanished
southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue. As they stood
upon the hillside, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over the
mountain-tops.
‘We must reach the doors before sunset,’ said Gandalf, ‘or I fear
we shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be
winding, for here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in
this country, and only once have I been under the west wall of Moria,
and that was long ago.
‘There it lies,’ he said, pointing away south-eastwards to where
the mountains’ sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet. In the
distance could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs, and in their midst,
taller than the rest, one great grey wall. ‘When we left the pass I led
you southwards, and not back to our starting point, as some of you
may have noticed. It is well that I did so, for now we have several
miles less to cross, and haste is needed. Let us go!’
‘I do not know which to hope,’ said Boromir grimly: ‘that Gandalf
will ﬁnd what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall ﬁnd the
gates lost for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between
wolves and the wall the likeliest chance. Lead on!’
Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard’s side, so eager was he to
come to Moria. Together they led the Company back towards the
mountains. The only road of old to Moria from the west had lain
along the course of a stream, the Sirannon, that ran out from the
feet of the cliffs near where the doors had stood. But either Gandalf
was astray, or else the land had changed in recent years; for he did
not strike the stream where he looked to ﬁnd it, only a few miles
southwards from their start.
The morning was passing towards noon, and still the Company
wandered and scrambled in a barren country of red stones. Nowhere
could they see any gleam of water or hear any sound of it. All was
bleak and dry. Their hearts sank. They saw no living thing, and not
a bird was in the sky; but what the night would bring, if it caught
them in that lost land, none of them cared to think.
Suddenly Gimli, who had pressed on ahead, called back to them.
He was standing on a knoll and pointing to the right. Hurrying up
they saw below them a deep and narrow channel. It was empty and
silent, and hardly a trickle of water ﬂowed among the brown and
red-stained stones of its bed; but on the near side there was a path,
much broken and decayed, that wound its way among the ruined
walls and paving-stones of an ancient highroad.
‘Ah! Here it is at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘This is where the stream
ran: Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

301

happened to the water, I cannot guess; it used to be swift and noisy.
Come! We must hurry on. We are late.’
The Company were footsore and tired; but they trudged doggedly
along the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned
from the noon and began to go west. After a brief halt and a hasty
meal they went on again. Before them the mountains frowned, but
their path lay in a deep trough of land and they could see only the
higher shoulders and the far eastward peaks.
At length they came to a sharp bend. There the road, which had
been veering southwards between the brink of the channel and a
steep fall of the land to the left, turned and went due east again.
Rounding the corner they saw before them a low cliff, some ﬁve
fathoms high, with a broken and jagged top. Over it a trickling water
dripped, through a wide cleft that seemed to have been carved out
by a fall that had once been strong and full.
‘Indeed things have changed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no mistaking the place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I
remember right, there was a ﬂight of steps cut in the rock at their
side, but the main road wound away left and climbed with several
loops up to the level ground at the top. There used to be a shallow
valley beyond the falls right up to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon ﬂowed through it with the road beside it. Let us go and see what
things are like now!’
They found the stone steps without difﬁculty, and Gimli sprang
swiftly up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached
the top they saw that they could go no further that way, and the
reason for the drying up of the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind
them the sinking Sun ﬁlled the cool western sky with glimmering
gold. Before them stretched a dark still lake. Neither sky nor sunset
was reﬂected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had been dammed
and had ﬁlled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were reared
vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light: ﬁnal and impassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a ﬁssure or crack could Frodo
see in the frowning stone.
‘There are the Walls of Moria,’ said Gandalf, pointing across the
water. ‘And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door
at the end of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this
way is blocked. None of the Company, I guess, will wish to swim
this gloomy water at the end of the day. It has an unwholesome look.’
‘We must ﬁnd a way round the northern edge,’ said Gimli. ‘The
ﬁrst thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the main path
and see where that will lead us. Even if there were no lake, we could
not get our baggage-pony up this stair.’

302

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,’
said Gandalf. ‘The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there
are places narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Frodo. ‘I had not thought of that. And poor
Sam! I wonder what he will say?’
‘I am sorry,’ said Gandalf. ‘Poor Bill has been a useful companion,
and it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled
lighter and brought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond
of, if I had had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged
to take this road.’
The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in
the sky high above the sunset, when the Company, with all the speed
they could, climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake.
In breadth it looked to be no more than two or three furlongs at the
widest point. How far it stretched away southward they could not
see in the failing light; but its northern end was no more than half a
mile from where they stood, and between the stony ridges that
enclosed the valley and the water’s edge there was a rim of open
ground. They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two to go
before they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was
making for; and then he had still to ﬁnd the doors.
When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake they found
a narrow creek that barred their way. It was green and stagnant,
thrust out like a slimy arm towards the enclosing hills. Gimli strode
forward undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more
than ankle-deep at the edge. Behind him they walked in ﬁle, threading
their way with care, for under the weedy pools were sliding and greasy
stones, and footing was treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust
at the touch of the dark unclean water on his feet.
As Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill up on to the dry ground
on the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop,
as if a ﬁsh had disturbed the still surface of the water. Turning quickly
they saw ripples, black-edged with shadow in the waning light: great
rings were widening outwards from a point far out in the lake. There
was a bubbling noise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and the
last gleams of the sunset were veiled in cloud.
Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others followed
as quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry land between
the lake and the cliffs: it was narrow, often hardly a dozen yards
across, and encumbered with fallen rock and stones; but they found
a way, hugging the cliff, and keeping as far from the dark water as
they might. A mile southwards along the shore they came upon holly
trees. Stumps and dead boughs were rotting in the shallows, the

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

303

remains it seemed of old thickets, or of a hedge that had once lined
the road across the drowned valley. But close under the cliff there
stood, still strong and living, two tall trees, larger than any trees of
holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined. Their great roots spread
from the wall to the water. Under the looming cliffs they had looked
like mere bushes, when seen far off from the top of the Stair; but
now they towered overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing deep
night-shadows about their feet, standing like sentinel pillars at the
end of the road.
‘Well, here we are at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘Here the Elven-way from
Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of that land, and they
planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West-door was
made chieﬂy for their use in their trafﬁc with the Lords of Moria. Those
were happier days, when there was still close friendship at times
between folk of different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.’
‘It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned,’
said Gimli.
‘I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,’ said Legolas.
‘I have heard both,’ said Gandalf; ‘and I will not give judgement
now. But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends,
and to help me. I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden,
and the sooner we ﬁnd them the better. Night is at hand!’
Turning to the others he said: ‘While I am searching, will you
each make ready to enter the Mines? For here I fear we must say
farewell to our good beast of burden. You must lay aside much of
the stuff that we brought against bitter weather: you will not need it
inside, nor, I hope, when we come through and journey on down
into the South. Instead each of us must take a share of what the pony
carried, especially the food and the water-skins.’
‘But you can’t leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken place,
Mr. Gandalf !’ cried Sam, angry and distressed. ‘I won’t have it, and
that’s ﬂat. After he has come so far and all!’
‘I am sorry, Sam,’ said the wizard. ‘But when the Door opens I
do not think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long
dark of Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.’
‘He’d follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon’s den, if I led him,’ protested
Sam. ‘It’d be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these
wolves about.’
‘It will be short of murder, I hope,’ said Gandalf. He laid his hand
on the pony’s head, and spoke in a low voice. ‘Go with words of
guard and guiding on you,’ he said. ‘You are a wise beast, and have
learned much in Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can
ﬁnd grass, and so come in time to Elrond’s house, or wherever you
wish to go.

304

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘There, Sam! He will have quite as much chance of escaping wolves
and getting home as we have.’
Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill,
seeming to understand well what was going on, nuzzled up to him,
putting his nose to Sam’s ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled
with the straps, unlading all the pony’s packs and throwing them on
the ground. The others sorted out the goods, making a pile of all
that could be left behind, and dividing up the rest.
When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He appeared
to have done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing
at the blank wall of the cliff, as if he would bore a hole into it with
his eyes. Gimli was wandering about, tapping the stone here and
there with his axe. Legolas was pressed against the rock, as if listening.
‘Well, here we are and all ready,’ said Merry; ‘but where are the
Doors? I can’t see any sign of them.’
‘Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,’ said Gimli.
‘They are invisible, and their own makers cannot ﬁnd them or open
them, if their secret is forgotten.’
‘But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to
Dwarves,’ said Gandalf, coming suddenly to life and turning round.
‘Unless things are altogether changed, eyes that know what to look
for may discover the signs.’
He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow of the
trees there was a smooth space, and over this he passed his hands to
and fro, muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘Can you see anything now?’
The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock; but they
could see nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the surface, where
the wizard’s hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins
of silver running in the stone. At ﬁrst they were no more than pale
gossamer-threads, so ﬁne that they only twinkled ﬁtfully where the
Moon caught them, but steadily they grew broader and clearer, until
their design could be guessed.
At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of interlacing letters in an Elvish character. Below, though the threads were
in places blurred or broken, the outline could be seen of an anvil and
a hammer surmounted by a crown with seven stars. Beneath these
again were two trees, each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than
all else there shone forth in the middle of the door a single star with
many rays.
‘There are the emblems of Durin!’ cried Gimli.
‘And there is the Tree of the High Elves!’ said Legolas.
‘And the Star of the House of Fëanor,’ said Gandalf. ‘They are
wrought of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and

306

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten
in Middle-earth. It is long since I heard them, and I thought deeply
before I could recall them to my mind.’
‘What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying to
decipher the inscription on the arch. ‘I thought I knew the elf-letters,
but I cannot read these.’
‘The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth
in the Elder Days,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But they do not say anything
of importance to us. They say only: The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria.
Speak, friend, and enter. And underneath small and faint is written:
I, Narvi, made them. Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.’
‘What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?’ asked Merry.
‘That is plain enough,’ said Gimli. ‘If you are a friend, speak the
password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘these doors are probably governed by words.
Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular
persons; and some have locks and keys that are still needed when all
necessary times and words are known. These doors have no key. In
the days of Durin they were not secret. They usually stood open and
doorwards sat here. But if they were shut, any who knew the opening
word could speak it and pass in. At least so it is recorded, is it not,
Gimli?’
‘It is,’ said the dwarf. ‘But what the word was is not remembered.
Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.’
‘But do not you know the word, Gandalf ?’ asked Boromir in surprise.
‘No!’ said the wizard.
The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf
well, remained silent and unmoved.
‘Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?’ cried
Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at the dark water. ‘You told
us that you had once passed through the Mines. How could that be,
if you did not know how to enter?’
‘The answer to your ﬁrst question, Boromir,’ said the wizard, ‘is
that I do not know the word – yet. But we shall soon see. And,’ he
added, with a glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, ‘you may
ask what is the use of my deeds when they are proved useless. As for
your other question: do you doubt my tale? Or have you no wits left?
I did not enter this way. I came from the East.
‘If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors open outwards.
From the inside you may thrust them open with your hands. From
the outside nothing will move them save the spell of command. They
cannot be forced inwards.’
‘What are you going to do then?’ asked Pippin, undaunted by the
wizard’s bristling brows.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

307

‘Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,’ said Gandalf.
‘But if that does not shatter them, and I am allowed a little peace
from foolish questions, I will seek for the opening words.
‘I once knew every spell in all the tongues of Elves or Men or
Orcs, that was ever used for such a purpose. I can still remember
ten score of them without searching in my mind. But only a few
trials, I think, will be needed; and I shall not have to call on Gimli
for words of the secret dwarf-tongue that they teach to none. The
opening words were Elvish, like the writing on the arch: that seems
certain.’
He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff
the silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil.
Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen!
Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!
he said in a commanding voice. The silver lines faded, but the blank
grey stone did not stir.
Many times he repeated these words in different order, or varied
them. Then he tried other spells, one after another, speaking now
faster and louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single
words of Elvish speech. Nothing happened. The cliff towered into
the night, the countless stars were kindled, the wind blew cold, and
the doors stood fast.
Again Gandalf approached the wall, and lifting up his arms he
spoke in tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and
struck the rock with his staff. Open, open! he shouted, and followed it
with the same command in every language that had ever been spoken
in the West of Middle-earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground,
and sat down in silence.
At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening ears
the howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang
to his side and whispered softly to him.
‘Do not let him run away!’ said Boromir. ‘It seems that we shall
need him still, if the wolves do not ﬁnd us. How I hate this foul
pool!’ He stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the
dark water.
The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at the same instant there
was a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface
out beyond where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly
towards the foot of the cliff.
‘Why did you do that, Boromir?’ said Frodo. ‘I hate this place,
too, and I am afraid. I don’t know of what: not of wolves, or the

308

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

dark behind the doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool.
Don’t disturb it!’
‘I wish we could get away!’ said Merry.
‘Why doesn’t Gandalf do something quick?’ said Pippin.
Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head bowed,
either in despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the
wolves was heard again. The ripples on the water grew and came
closer; some were already lapping on the shore.
With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang to his
feet. He was laughing! ‘I have it!’ he cried. ‘Of course, of course!
Absurdly simple, like most riddles when you see the answer.’
Picking up his staff he stood before the rock and said in a clear
voice: Mellon!
The star shone out brieﬂy and faded again. Then silently a great
doorway was outlined, though not a crack or joint had been visible
before. Slowly it divided in the middle and swung outwards inch by
inch, until both doors lay back against the wall. Through the opening
a shadowy stair could be seen climbing steeply up; but beyond the
lower steps the darkness was deeper than the night. The Company
stared in wonder.
‘I was wrong after all,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli too. Merry, of all
people, was on the right track. The opening word was inscribed on
the archway all the time! The translation should have been: Say
‘‘Friend’’ and enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend
and the doors opened. Quite simple. Too simple for a learned loremaster in these suspicious days. Those were happier times. Now let
us go!’
He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step. But at that
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by
the ankle, and he fell with a cry. Bill the pony gave a wild neigh of
fear, and turned tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the
darkness. Sam leaped after him, and then hearing Frodo’s cry he ran
back again, weeping and cursing. The others swung round and saw
the waters of the lake seething, as if a host of snakes were swimming
up from the southern end.
Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it was
pale-green and luminous and wet. Its ﬁngered end had hold of
Frodo’s foot, and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees
was now slashing at it with a knife.
The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out
for help. Twenty other arms came rippling out. The dark water
boiled, and there was a hideous stench.
‘Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick!’ shouted Gandalf leaping

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

309

back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all
but Sam to the ground where they stood, he drove them forward.
They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up,
and Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles
writhed across the narrow shore and ﬁngered the cliff-wall and the
doors. One came wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned and paused. If he was considering what word
would close the gate again from within, there was no need. Many
coiling arms seized the doors on either side, and with horrible
strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo they slammed,
and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came dully
through the ponderous stone.
Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collapsed on a step in the black
darkness. ‘Poor old Bill!’ he said in a choking voice. ‘Poor old Bill!
Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to
choose, Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.’
They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his staff
against the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs
trembled, but the doors did not open.
‘Well, well!’ said the wizard. ‘The passage is blocked behind us
now, and there is only one way out – on the other side of the mountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders have been piled up, and
the trees uprooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the
trees were beautiful, and had stood so long.’
‘I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my
foot ﬁrst touched the water,’ said Frodo. ‘What was the thing, or
were there many of them?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf; ‘but the arms were all guided
by one purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark
waters under the mountains. There are older and fouler things than
Orcs in the deep places of the world.’ He did not speak aloud his
thought that whatever it was that dwelt in the lake, it had seized on
Frodo ﬁrst among all the Company.
Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone magniﬁed the sound to a hoarse whisper that all could hear: ‘In the deep
places of the world! And thither we are going against my wish. Who
will lead us now in this deadly dark?’
‘I will,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my
staff !’
As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps, he held his staff
aloft, and from its tip there came a faint radiance. The wide stairway
was sound and undamaged. Two hundred steps they counted, broad

310

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and shallow; and at the top they found an arched passage with a level
ﬂoor leading on into the dark.
‘Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing,
since we can’t ﬁnd a dining-room!’ said Frodo. He had begun to
shake off the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt
extremely hungry.
The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the
upper steps, dim ﬁgures in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf
gave them each a third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell.
‘It will not last much longer, I am afraid,’ he said; ‘but I think we
need it after that horror at the gate. And unless we have great luck,
we shall need all that is left before we see the other side! Go carefully
with the water, too! There are many streams and wells in the Mines,
but they should not be touched. We may not have a chance of ﬁlling
our skins and bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.’
‘How long is that going to take us?’ asked Frodo.
‘I cannot say,’ answered Gandalf. ‘It depends on many chances. But
going straight, without mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or
four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from Westdoor to East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.’
After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were
eager to get the journey over as quickly as possible, and were willing,
tired as they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf
walked in front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering
staff, the light of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his
right he held his sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes
glinting in the dim light as he turned his head from side to side.
Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and he had drawn the short sword,
Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting or of Glamdring; and
that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish smiths in the
Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs were
near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and
the young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and
silent, walked Aragorn.
The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend.
It went steadily down for a long while before it became level once
again. The air grew hot and stiﬂing, but it was not foul, and at
times they felt currents of cooler air upon their faces, issuing from
half-guessed openings in the walls. There were many of these. In the
pale ray of the wizard’s staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and
arches, and of other passages and tunnels, sloping up, or running
steeply down, or opening blankly dark on either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

311

Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage. At
least he was not, as were most of the others, troubled by the mere
darkness in itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where
the choice of way was doubtful; but it was always Gandalf who had
the ﬁnal word. The Mines of Moria were vast and intricate beyond the
imagination of Gimli, Glóin’s son, dwarf of the mountain-race though
he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of a journey long before were
now of little help, but even in the gloom and despite all windings of
the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did not falter, as
long as there was a path that led towards his goal.
‘Do not be afraid!’ said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than
usual, and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together; the others
were crowded behind, waiting anxiously. ‘Do not be afraid! I have
been with him on many a journey, if never on one so dark; and there
are tales in Rivendell of greater deeds of his than any that I have
seen. He will not go astray – if there is any path to ﬁnd. He has led
us in here against our fears, but he will lead us out again, at whatever
cost to himself. He is surer of ﬁnding the way home in a blind night
than the cats of Queen Berúthiel.’
It was well for the Company that they had such a guide. They had
no fuel nor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at
the doors many things had been left behind. But without any light
they would soon have come to grief. There were not only many roads
to choose from, there were also in many places holes and pitfalls,
and dark wells beside the path in which their passing feet echoed.
There were ﬁssures and chasms in the walls and ﬂoor, and every now
and then a crack would open right before their feet. The widest was
more than seven feet across, and it was long before Pippin could
summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap. The noise
of churning water came up from far below, as if some great mill-wheel
was turning in the depths.
‘Rope!’ muttered Sam. ‘I knew I’d want it, if I hadn’t got it!’
As these dangers became more frequent their march became
slower. Already they seemed to have been tramping on, on, endlessly
to the mountains’ roots. They were more than weary, and yet there
seemed no comfort in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo’s spirits
had risen for a while after his escape, and after food and a draught
of the cordial; but now a deep uneasiness, growing to dread, crept
over him again. Though he had been healed in Rivendell of the
knife-stroke, that grim wound had not been without effect. His senses
were sharper and more aware of things that could not be seen. One
sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could see more

312

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in the dark than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And
he was in any case the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain
against his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt
the certainty of evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing.
He gripped tighter on the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly.
The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried
whispers. There was no sound but the sound of their own feet: the
dull stump of Gimli’s dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the light
step of Legolas; the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the
rear the slow ﬁrm footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they
halted for a moment they heard nothing at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear,
or to imagine that he heard, something else: like the faint fall of soft
bare feet. It was never loud enough, or near enough, for him to feel
certain that he heard it; but once it had started it never stopped, while
the Company was moving. But it was not an echo, for when they halted
it pattered on for a little all by itself, and then grew still.
It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines. They had
been going for several hours with only brief halts, when Gandalf
came to his ﬁrst serious check. Before him stood a wide dark arch
opening into three passages: all led in the same general direction,
eastwards; but the left-hand passage plunged down, while the righthand climbed up, and the middle way seemed to run on, smooth
and level but very narrow.
‘I have no memory of this place at all!’ said Gandalf, standing
uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of ﬁnding
some marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of
the kind was to be seen. ‘I am too weary to decide,’ he said, shaking
his head. ‘And I expect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier.
We had better halt here for what is left of the night. You know what
I mean! In here it is ever dark; but outside the late Moon is riding
westward and the middle-night has passed.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Sam. ‘I wonder where he is. I hope those
wolves haven’t got him yet.’
To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it was half
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed
to lie a wide chamber cut in the rock.
‘Steady! Steady!’ cried Gandalf, as Merry and Pippin pushed forward, glad to ﬁnd a place where they could rest with at least more
feeling of shelter than in the open passage. ‘Steady! You do not know
what is inside yet. I will go ﬁrst.’
He went in cautiously, and the others ﬁled behind. ‘There!’ he
said, pointing with his staff to the middle of the ﬂoor. Before his feet

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

313

they saw a large round hole like the mouth of a well. Broken and
rusty chains lay at the edge and trailed down into the black pit.
Fragments of stone lay near.
‘One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you
were going to strike the bottom,’ said Aragorn to Merry. ‘Let the
guide go ﬁrst while you have one.’
‘This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of
the three passages,’ said Gimli. ‘That hole was plainly a well for the
guards’ use, covered with a stone lid. But the lid is broken, and we
must all take care in the dark.’
Pippin felt curiously attracted by the well. While the others were
unrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber,
as far as possible from the hole in the ﬂoor, he crept to the edge and
peered over. A chill air seemed to strike his face, rising from invisible
depths. Moved by a sudden impulse he groped for a loose stone, and
let it drop. He felt his heart beat many times before there was any
sound. Then far below, as if the stone had fallen into deep water in
some cavernous place, there came a plunk, very distant, but magniﬁed
and repeated in the hollow shaft.
‘What’s that?’ cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Pippin confessed what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see his
eye glinting. ‘Fool of a Took!’ he growled. ‘This is a serious journey,
not a hobbit walking-party. Throw yourself in next time, and then
you will be no further nuisance. Now be quiet!’
Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then there came
out of the depths faint knocks: tom-tap, tap-tom. They stopped, and
when the echoes had died away, they were repeated: tap-tom, tom-tap,
tap-tap, tom. They sounded disquietingly like signals of some sort;
but after a while the knocking died away and was not heard again.
‘That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,’
said Gimli.
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I do not like it. It may have nothing to
do with Peregrin’s foolish stone; but probably something has been
disturbed that would have been better left quiet. Pray, do nothing of
the kind again! Let us hope we shall get some rest without further
trouble. You, Pippin, can go on the ﬁrst watch, as a reward,’ he
growled, as he rolled himself in a blanket.
Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he kept on
turning round, fearing that some unknown thing would crawl up out
of the well. He wished he could cover the hole, if only with a blanket,
but he dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed
to be asleep.
Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. He was
deep in thought, trying to recall every memory of his former journey

314

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in the Mines, and considering anxiously the next course that he
should take; a false turn now might be disastrous. After an hour he
rose up and came over to Pippin.
‘Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,’ he said in a kindly
tone. ‘You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so I may as
well do the watching.’
‘I know what is the matter with me,’ he muttered, as he sat down
by the door. ‘I need smoke! I have not tasted it since the morning
before the snowstorm.’
The last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took him, was a dark
glimpse of the old wizard huddled on the ﬂoor, shielding a glowing
chip in his gnarled hands between his knees. The ﬂicker for a moment
showed his sharp nose, and the puff of smoke.
It was Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He had sat and
watched all alone for about six hours, and had let the others rest.
‘And in the watches I have made up my mind,’ he said. ‘I do not
like the feel of the middle way; and I do not like the smell of the
left-hand way: there is foul air down there, or I am no guide. I shall
take the right-hand passage. It is time we began to climb up again.’
For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they marched
on; and they met no danger, and heard nothing, and saw nothing but
the faint gleam of the wizard’s light, bobbing like a will-o’-the-wisp in
front of them. The passage they had chosen wound steadily upwards.
As far as they could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as
it rose it grew loftier and wider. There were now no openings to
other galleries or tunnels on either side, and the ﬂoor was level and
sound, without pits or cracks. Evidently they had struck what once
had been an important road; and they went forward quicker than
they had done on their ﬁrst march.
In this way they advanced some ﬁfteen miles, measured in a direct
line east, though they must have actually walked twenty miles or
more. As the road climbed upwards, Frodo’s spirits rose a little; but
he still felt oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard,
away behind the Company and beyond the fall and patter of their
feet, a following footstep that was not an echo.
They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest,
and all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly
the walls to right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed
through some arched doorway into a black and empty space. There
was a great draught of warmer air behind them, and before them the
darkness was cold on their faces. They halted and crowded anxiously
together.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

315

Gandalf seemed pleased. ‘I chose the right way,’ he said. ‘At last
we are coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far
now from the eastern side. But we are high up, a good deal higher
than the Dimrill Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the
air we must be in a wide hall. I will now risk a little real light.’
He raised his staff, and for a brief instant there was a blaze like a
ﬂash of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and ﬂed, and for a second
they saw a vast roof far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars
hewn of stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty
hall; its black walls, polished and smooth as glass, ﬂashed and glittered.
Three other entrances they saw, dark black arches: one straight before
them eastwards, and one on either side. Then the light went out.
‘That is all that I shall venture on for the present,’ said Gandalf.
‘There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts
leading out to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think
we have reached them now, but it is night outside again, and we
cannot tell until morning. If I am right, tomorrow we may actually
see the morning peeping in. But in the meanwhile we had better go
no further. Let us rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and
the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are not through yet,
and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on the world.’
The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled
close together in a corner to escape the draught: there seemed to be
a steady inﬂow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about
them as they lay hung the darkness, hollow and immense, and they
were oppressed by the loneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and
endlessly branching stairs and passages. The wildest imaginings that
dark rumour had ever suggested to the hobbits fell altogether short
of the actual dread and wonder of Moria.
‘There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one
time,’ said Sam; ‘and every one of them busier than badgers for ﬁve
hundred years to make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did
they do it all for? They didn’t live in these darksome holes surely?’
‘These are not holes,’ said Gimli. ‘This is the great realm and city
of the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, but full of light
and splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.’
He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a deep
voice, while the echoes ran away into the roof.
The world was young, the mountains green,
No stain yet on the Moon was seen,
No words were laid on stream or stone
When Durin woke and walked alone.

316

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He named the nameless hills and dells;
He drank from yet untasted wells;
He stooped and looked in Mirrormere,
And saw a crown of stars appear,
As gems upon a silver thread,
Above the shadow of his head.
The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have passed away:
The world was fair in Durin’s Day.
A king he was on carven throne
In many-pillared halls of stone
With golden roof and silver ﬂoor,
And runes of power upon the door.
The light of sun and star and moon
In shining lamps of crystal hewn
Undimmed by cloud or shade of night
There shone for ever fair and bright.
There hammer on the anvil smote,
There chisel clove, and graver wrote;
There forged was blade, and bound was hilt;
The delver mined, the mason built.
There beryl, pearl, and opal pale,
And metal wrought like ﬁshes’ mail,
Buckler and corslet, axe and sword,
And shining spears were laid in hoard.
Unwearied then were Durin’s folk;
Beneath the mountains music woke:
The harpers harped, the minstrels sang,
And at the gates the trumpets rang.
The world is grey, the mountains old,
The forge’s ﬁre is ashen-cold;
No harp is wrung, no hammer falls:
The darkness dwells in Durin’s halls;
The shadow lies upon his tomb
In Moria, in Khazad-dûm.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

317

But still the sunken stars appear
In dark and windless Mirrormere;
There lies his crown in water deep,
Till Durin wakes again from sleep.
‘I like that!’ said Sam. ‘I should like to learn it. In Moria, in
Khazad-dûm! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking of all
those lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still?’
Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more.
‘Piles of jewels?’ said Gandalf. ‘No. The Orcs have often plundered
Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves
ﬂed, no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep
places: they are drowned in water – or in a shadow of fear.’
‘Then what do the dwarves want to come back for?’ asked Sam.
‘For mithril,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The wealth of Moria was not in
gold and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant.
Such things they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did
not need to delve for them: all things that they desired they could
obtain in trafﬁc. For here alone in the world was found Moria-silver,
or true-silver as some have called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The
Dwarves have a name which they do not tell. Its worth was ten times
that of gold, and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground,
and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. The lodes lead away
north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The Dwarves tell
no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their wealth, so
also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too deep,
and disturbed that from which they ﬂed, Durin’s Bane. Of what they
brought to light the Orcs have gathered nearly all, and given it in
tribute to Sauron, who covets it.
‘Mithril! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper, and
polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light
and yet harder than tempered steel. Its beauty was like to that of
common silver, but the beauty of mithril did not tarnish or grow dim.
The Elves dearly loved it, and among many uses they made of it
ithildin, starmoon, which you saw upon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet
of mithril-rings that Thorin gave him. I wonder what has become of
it? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving Mathom-house, I suppose.’
‘What?’ cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. ‘A corslet of Moriasilver? That was a kingly gift!’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I never told him, but its worth was greater
than the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.’
Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and
touched the rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he
had been walking about with the price of the Shire under his jacket.

318

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Had Bilbo known? He felt no doubt that Bilbo knew quite well. It
was indeed a kingly gift. But now his thoughts had been carried away
from the dark Mines, to Rivendell, to Bilbo, and to Bag End in the
days while Bilbo was still there. He wished with all his heart that he
was back there, and in those days, mowing the lawn, or pottering
among the ﬂowers, and that he had never heard of Moria, or mithril
– or the Ring.
A deep silence fell. One by one the others fell asleep. Frodo was
on guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors
out of deep places, dread came over him. His hands were cold and
his brow damp. He listened. All his mind was given to listening and
nothing else for two slow hours; but he heard no sound, not even
the imagined echo of a footfall.
His watch was nearly over, when, far off where he guessed that
the western archway stood, he fancied that he could see two pale
points of light, almost like luminous eyes. He started. His head had
nodded. ‘I must have nearly fallen asleep on guard,’ he thought. ‘I
was on the edge of a dream.’ He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and
remained standing, peering into the dark, until he was relieved by
Legolas.
When he lay down he quickly went to sleep, but it seemed to him
that the dream went on: he heard whispers, and saw the two pale
points of light approaching, slowly. He woke and found that the
others were speaking softly near him, and that a dim light was falling
on his face. High up above the eastern archway through a shaft near
the roof came a long pale gleam; and across the hall through the
northern arch light also glimmered faint and distantly.
Frodo sat up. ‘Good morning!’ said Gandalf. ‘For morning it is
again at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side
of Moria. Before today is over we ought to ﬁnd the Great Gates and
see the waters of Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.’
‘I shall be glad,’ said Gimli. ‘I have looked on Moria, and it is
very great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found
no sign of my kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.’
After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once.
‘We are tired, but we shall rest better when we are outside,’ he said.
‘I think that none of us will wish to spend another night in
Moria.’
‘No indeed!’ said Boromir. ‘Which way shall we take? Yonder
eastward arch?’
‘Maybe,’ said Gandalf. ‘But I do not know yet exactly where we
are. Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are above and to the

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

319

north of the Great Gates; and it may not be easy to ﬁnd the right
road down to them. The eastern arch will probably prove to be the
way that we must take; but before we make up our minds we ought
to look about us. Let us go towards that light in the north door. If
we could ﬁnd a window it would help, but I fear that the light comes
only down deep shafts.’
Following his lead the Company passed under the northern arch.
They found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the
glimmer grew stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway
on their right. It was high and ﬂat-topped, and the stone door was
still upon its hinges, standing half open. Beyond it was a large square
chamber. It was dimly lit, but to their eyes, after so long a time in
the dark, it seemed dazzlingly bright, and they blinked as they entered.
Their feet disturbed a deep dust upon the ﬂoor, and stumbled
among things lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at
ﬁrst make out. The chamber was lit by a wide shaft high in the further
eastern wall; it slanted upwards and, far above, a small square patch
of blue sky could be seen. The light of the shaft fell directly on a
table in the middle of the room: a single oblong block, about two
feet high, upon which was laid a great slab of white stone.
‘It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards with a
curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. Gandalf came
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven:

320

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘These are Daeron’s Runes, such as were used of old in Moria,’
said Gandalf. ‘Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:
balin son of fundin
lord of moria.’
‘He is dead then,’ said Frodo. ‘I feared it was so.’ Gimli cast his
hood over his face.

Chapter 5
ˆ M
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU
The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin.
Frodo thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with the dwarf, and
of Balin’s visit to the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the
mountains it seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of
the world.
At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search for
anything that would give them tidings of Balin’s fate, or show what
had become of his folk. There was another smaller door on the other
side of the chamber, under the shaft. By both the doors they could
now see that many bones were lying, and among them were broken
swords and axe-heads, and cloven shields and helms. Some of the
swords were crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades.
There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them
were large iron-bound chests of wood. All had been broken and
plundered; but beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains
of a book. It had been slashed and stabbed and partly burned, and
it was so stained with black and other dark marks like old blood that
little of it could be read. Gandalf lifted it carefully, but the leaves
cracked and broke as he laid it on the slab. He pored over it for some
time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli standing at his side could
see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they were written by many
different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale, and here and
there in Elvish script.
At last Gandalf looked up. ‘It seems to be a record of the fortunes
of Balin’s folk,’ he said. ‘I guess that it began with their coming to
Dimrill Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the pages seem to have numbers
referring to the years after their arrival. The top page is marked one
– three, so at least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!
‘We drove out orcs from the great gate and guard – I think; the next
word is blurred and burned: probably room – we slew many in the
bright – I think – sun in the dale. Flói was killed by an arrow. He slew
the great. Then there is a blur followed by Flói under grass near Mirror
mere. The next line or two I cannot read. Then comes We have taken
the twentyﬁrst hall of North end to dwell in. There is I cannot read what.
A shaft is mentioned. Then Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of
Mazarbul.’
‘The Chamber of Records,’ said Gimli. ‘I guess that is where we
now stand.’

322

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Well, I can read no more for a long way,’ said Gandalf, ‘except
the word gold, and Durin’s Axe and something helm. Then Balin is
now lord of Moria. That seems to end a chapter. After some stars
another hand begins, and I can see we found truesilver, and later the
word wellforged, and then something, I have it! mithril; and the last
´ to seek for the upper armouries of Third Deep, something
two lines Oin
go westwards, a blur, to Hollin gate.’
Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. ‘There are several pages
of the same sort, rather hastily written and much damaged,’ he said;
‘but I can make little of them in this light. Now there must be a
number of leaves missing, because they begin to be numbered ﬁve,
the ﬁfth year of the colony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too
cut and stained; I cannot read them. We might do better in the
sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a large bold hand using an Elvish
script.’
‘That would be Ori’s hand,’ said Gimli, looking over the wizard’s
arm. ‘He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish
characters.’
‘I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,’ said Gandalf.
‘The ﬁrst clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless
it ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre followed by day being the tenth
of novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to
look in Mirror mere. an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc,
but many more ... up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the
page is so blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think
I can read we have barred the gates, and then can hold them long if,
and then perhaps horrible and suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have
kept the title that he took for less than ﬁve years. I wonder what
happened afterwards; but there is no time to puzzle out the last few
pages. Here is the last page of all.’ He paused and sighed.
‘It is grim reading,’ he said. ‘I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We
cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken the Bridge and second
hall. Frár and Lóni and Náli fell there. Then there are four lines
smeared so that I can only read went 5 days ago. The last lines run
the pool is up to the wall at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took
´
Oin.
We cannot get out. The end comes, and then drums, drums in the
deep. I wonder what that means. The last thing written is in a trailing
scrawl of elf-letters: they are coming. There is nothing more.’ Gandalf
paused and stood in silent thought.
A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the Company.
‘We cannot get out,’ muttered Gimli. ‘It was well for us that the pool
had sunk a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the
southern end.’

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

323

Gandalf raised his head and looked round. ‘They seem to have
made a last stand by both doors,’ he said; ‘but there were not many
left by that time. So ended the attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant
but foolish. The time is not come yet. Now, I fear, we must say
farewell to Balin son of Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his
fathers. We will take this book, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at
it more closely later. You had better keep it, Gimli, and take it back
to Dáin, if you get a chance. It will interest him, though it will grieve
him deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.’
‘Which way shall we go?’ asked Boromir.
‘Back to the hall,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But our visit to this room
has not been in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as
Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the
twenty-ﬁrst of the North-end. Therefore we should leave by the
eastern arch of the hall, and bear right and south, and go downwards.
The Twenty-ﬁrst Hall should be on the Seventh Level, that is six
above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall!’
Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came a great
noise: a rolling Boom that seemed to come from depths far below,
and to tremble in the stone at their feet. They sprang towards the
door in alarm. Doom, doom it rolled again, as if huge hands were
turning the very caverns of Moria into a vast drum. Then there came
an echoing blast: a great horn was blown in the hall, and answering
horns and harsh cries were heard further off. There was a hurrying
sound of many feet.
‘They are coming!’ cried Legolas.
‘We cannot get out,’ said Gimli.
‘Trapped!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Why did I delay? Here we are, caught,
just as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see
what——’
Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook.
‘Slam the doors and wedge them!’ shouted Aragorn. ‘And keep
your packs on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our
way out yet.’
‘No!’ said Gandalf. ‘We must not get shut in. Keep the east door
ajar! We will go that way, if we get a chance.’
Another harsh horn-call and shrill cries rang out. Feet were coming
down the corridor. There was a ring and clatter as the Company
drew their swords. Glamdring shone with a pale light, and Sting
glinted at the edges. Boromir set his shoulder against the western
door.
‘Wait a moment! Do not close it yet!’ said Gandalf. He sprang
forward to Boromir’s side and drew himself up to his full height.

324

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria?’ he
cried in a loud voice.
There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding stones
into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command.
Doom, boom, doom went the drums in the deep.
With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the narrow opening of the door and thrust forward his staff. There was a dazzling
ﬂash that lit the chamber and the passage outside. For an instant the
wizard looked out. Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor
as he sprang back.
‘There are Orcs, very many of them,’ he said. ‘And some are large
and evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging
back, but there is something else there. A great cave-troll, I think,
or more than one. There is no hope of escape that way.’
‘And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,’ said
Boromir.
‘There is no sound outside here yet,’ said Aragorn, who was standing by the eastern door listening. ‘The passage on this side plunges
straight down a stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall.
But it is no good ﬂying blindly this way with the pursuit just behind.
We cannot block the door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken,
and it opens inwards. We must do something to delay the enemy
ﬁrst. We will make them fear the Chamber of Mazarbul!’ he said
grimly, feeling the edge of his sword, Andúril.
Heavy feet were heard in the corridor. Boromir ﬂung himself
against the door and heaved it to; then he wedged it with broken
sword-blades and splinters of wood. The Company retreated to the
other side of the chamber. But they had no chance to ﬂy yet. There
was a blow on the door that made it quiver; and then it began to
grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A huge arm and shoulder,
with a dark skin of greenish scales, was thrust through the widening
gap. Then a great, ﬂat, toeless foot was forced through below. There
was a dead silence outside.
Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might;
but his sword rang, glanced aside, and fell from his shaken hand.
The blade was notched.
Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a hot wrath blaze
up in his heart. ‘The Shire!’ he cried, and springing beside Boromir,
he stooped, and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was
a bellow, and the foot jerked back, nearly wrenching Sting from
Frodo’s arm. Black drops dripped from the blade and smoked on
the ﬂoor. Boromir hurled himself against the door and slammed it
again.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

325

‘One for the Shire!’ cried Aragorn. ‘The hobbit’s bite is deep! You
have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo!’
There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams
and hammers were beating against it. It cracked and staggered back,
and the opening grew suddenly wide. Arrows came whistling in, but
struck the northern wall, and fell harmlessly to the ﬂoor. There was
a horn-blast and a rush of feet, and orcs one after another leaped
into the chamber.
How many there were the Company could not count. The affray
was sharp, but the orcs were dismayed by the ﬁerceness of the
defence. Legolas shot two through the throat. Gimli hewed the legs
from under another that had sprung up on Balin’s tomb. Boromir and
Aragorn slew many. When thirteen had fallen the rest ﬂed shrieking,
leaving the defenders unharmed, except for Sam who had a scratch
along the scalp. A quick duck had saved him; and he had felled his
orc: a sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A ﬁre was smouldering
in his brown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman step backwards, if he had seen it.
‘Now is the time!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Let us go, before the troll
returns!’
But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had
reached the stair outside, a huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad
in black mail from head to foot, leaped into the chamber; behind
him his followers clustered in the doorway. His broad ﬂat face was
swart, his eyes were like coals, and his tongue was red; he wielded a
great spear. With a thrust of his huge hide shield he turned Boromir’s
sword and bore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Diving
under Aragorn’s blow with the speed of a striking snake he charged
into the Company and thrust with his spear straight at Frodo. The
blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo was hurled against the
wall and pinned. Sam, with a cry, hacked at the spear-shaft, and it
broke. But even as the orc ﬂung down the truncheon and swept out
his scimitar, Andúril came down upon his helm. There was a ﬂash
like ﬂame and the helm burst asunder. The orc fell with cloven
head. His followers ﬂed howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at
them.
Doom, doom went the drums in the deep. The great voice rolled
out again.
‘Now!’ shouted Gandalf. ‘Now is the last chance. Run for it!’
Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and made for
the stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in front of him. The others
followed; but Gimli had to be dragged away by Legolas: in spite of
the peril he lingered by Balin’s tomb with his head bowed. Boromir

326

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

hauled the eastern door to, grinding upon its hinges: it had great iron
rings on either side, but could not be fastened.
‘I am all right,’ gasped Frodo. ‘I can walk. Put me down!’
Aragorn nearly dropped him in his amazement. ‘I thought you
were dead!’ he cried.
‘Not yet!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no time for wonder. Off you
go, all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the
bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose
paths leading right and downwards.’
‘We cannot leave you to hold the door alone!’ said Aragorn.
‘Do as I say!’ said Gandalf ﬁercely. ‘Swords are no more use here.
Go!’
The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped
their way down a long ﬂight of steps, and then looked back; but they
could see nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer of the
wizard’s staff. He seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed
door. Frodo breathed heavily and leaned against Sam, who put his
arms about him. They stood peering up the stairs into the darkness.
Frodo thought he could hear the voice of Gandalf above, muttering
words that ran down the sloping roof with a sighing echo. He could
not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be trembling. Every
now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom, doom.
Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white light.
Then there was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats
broke out wildly: doom-boom, doom-boom, and then stopped. Gandalf
came ﬂying down the steps and fell to the ground in the midst of the
Company.
‘Well, well! That’s over!’ said the wizard struggling to his feet. ‘I
have done all that I could. But I have met my match, and have nearly
been destroyed. But don’t stand here! Go on! You will have to do
without light for a while: I am rather shaken. Go on! Go on! Where
are you, Gimli? Come ahead with me! Keep close behind, all of you!’
They stumbled after him wondering what had happened. Doom,
doom went the drum-beats again: they now sounded mufﬂed and far
away, but they were following. There was no other sound of pursuit,
neither tramp of feet, nor any voice. Gandalf took no turns, right or
left, for the passage seemed to be going in the direction that he
desired. Every now and again it descended a ﬂight of steps, ﬁfty or
more, to a lower level. At the moment that was their chief danger;
for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they came on it
and put their feet out into emptiness. Gandalf felt the ground with
his staff like a blind man.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

327

At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little
more, and had descended many ﬂights of stairs. There was still no
sound of pursuit. Almost they began to hope that they would escape.
At the bottom of the seventh ﬂight Gandalf halted.
‘It is getting hot!’ he gasped. ‘We ought to be down at least to the
level of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look for a left-hand
turn to take us east. I hope it is not far. I am very weary. I must rest
here a moment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.’
Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the step.
‘What happened away up there at the door?’ he asked. ‘Did you meet
the beater of the drums?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I found myself suddenly
faced by something that I have not met before. I could think of
nothing to do but to try and put a shutting-spell on the door. I know
many; but to do things of that kind rightly requires time, and even
then the door can be broken by strength.
‘As I stood there I could hear orc-voices on the other side: at any
moment I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear what
was said; they seemed to be talking in their own hideous language.
All I caught was ghâsh: that is ‘‘ﬁre’’. Then something came into the
chamber – I felt it through the door, and the orcs themselves were
afraid and fell silent. It laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived
me and my spell.
‘What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a challenge.
The counter-spell was terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the
door left my control and began to open! I had to speak a word of
Command. That proved too great a strain. The door burst in pieces.
Something dark as a cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and
I was thrown backwards down the stairs. All the wall gave way, and
the roof of the chamber as well, I think.
‘I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something else is
buried there too. I cannot say. But at least the passage behind us
was completely blocked. Ah! I have never felt so spent, but it is
passing. And now what about you, Frodo? There was not time to
say so, but I have never been more delighted in my life than when
you spoke. I feared that it was a brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn
was carrying.’
‘What about me?’ said Frodo. ‘I am alive, and whole I think. I am
bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.’
‘Well,’ said Aragorn, ‘I can only say that hobbits are made of a
stuff so tough that I have never met the like of it. Had I known, I
would have spoken softer in the Inn at Bree! That spear-thrust would
have skewered a wild boar!’
‘Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,’ said Frodo; ‘though

328

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

I feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.’ He
said no more. He found breathing painful.
‘You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘There is more about you
than meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if
the remark meant more than it said.
They now went on again. Before long Gimli spoke. He had keen
eyes in the dark. ‘I think,’ he said, ‘that there is a light ahead. But it
is not daylight. It is red. What can it be?’
‘Ghâsh!’ muttered Gandalf. ‘I wonder if that is what they meant:
that the lower levels are on ﬁre? Still, we can only go on.’
Soon the light became unmistakable, and could be seen by all. It
was ﬂickering and glowing on the walls away down the passage before
them. They could now see their way: in front the road sloped down
swiftly, and some way ahead there stood a low archway; through it
the growing light came. The air became very hot.
When they came to the arch Gandalf went through, signing to
them to wait. As he stood just beyond the opening they saw his face
lit by a red glow. Quickly he stepped back.
‘There is some new devilry here,’ he said, ‘devised for our welcome,
no doubt. But I know now where we are: we have reached the First
Deep, the level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second
Hall of Old Moria; and the Gates are near: away beyond the eastern
end, on the left, not more than a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge,
up a broad stair, along a wide road, through the First Hall, and out!
But come and look!’
They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was
loftier and far longer than the one in which they had slept. They
were near its eastern end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down
the centre stalked a double line of towering pillars. They were carved
like boles of mighty trees whose boughs upheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems were smooth and black, but a red
glow was darkly mirrored in their sides. Right across the ﬂoor, close
to the feet of two huge pillars a great ﬁssure had opened. Out of it
a ﬁerce red light came, and now and again ﬂames licked at the brink
and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps of dark smoke
wavered in the hot air.
‘If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we
should have been trapped here,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us hope that the ﬁre
now lies between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.’
Even as he spoke they heard again the pursuing drum-beat: Doom,
doom, doom. Away beyond the shadows at the western end of the hall
there came cries and horn-calls. Doom, doom: the pillars seemed to
tremble and the ﬂames to quiver.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

329

‘Now for the last race!’ said Gandalf. ‘If the sun is shining outside,
we may still escape. After me!’
He turned left and sped across the smooth ﬂoor of the hall. The
distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the
beat and echo of many hurrying feet behind. A shrill yell went up:
they had been seen. There was a ring and clash of steel. An arrow
whistled over Frodo’s head.
Boromir laughed. ‘They did not expect this,’ he said. ‘The ﬁre
has cut them off. We are on the wrong side!’
‘Look ahead!’ called Gandalf. ‘The Bridge is near. lt is dangerous
and narrow.’
Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the
hall the ﬂoor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. The outer door
could only be reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or
rail, that spanned the chasm with one curving spring of ﬁfty feet. It
was an ancient defence of the Dwarves against any enemy that might
capture the First Hall and the outer passages. They could only pass
across it in single ﬁle. At the brink Gandalf halted and the others
came up in a pack behind.
‘Lead the way, Gimli!’ he said. ‘Pippin and Merry next. Straight
on, and up the stair beyond the door!’
Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang back.
Another pierced Gandalf ’s hat and stuck there like a black feather.
Frodo looked behind. Beyond the ﬁre he saw swarming black ﬁgures:
there seemed to be hundreds of orcs. They brandished spears and
scimitars which shone red as blood in the ﬁrelight. Doom, doom rolled
the drum-beats, growing louder and louder, doom, doom.
Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it was a long
shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow
slipped to the ground. He gave a cry of dismay and fear. Two great
trolls appeared; they bore great slabs of stone, and ﬂung them down
to serve as gangways over the ﬁre. But it was not the trolls that had
ﬁlled the Elf with terror. The ranks of the orcs had opened, and they
crowded away, as if they themselves were afraid. Something was
coming up behind them. What it was could not be seen: it was like
a great shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form, of man-shape
maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to be in it and
to go before it.
It came to the edge of the ﬁre and the light faded as if a cloud
had bent over it. Then with a rush it leaped across the ﬁssure. The
ﬂames roared up to greet it, and wreathed about it; and a black smoke
swirled in the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it.
In its right hand was a blade like a stabbing tongue of ﬁre; in its left
it held a whip of many thongs.

330

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Ai! ai!’ wailed Legolas. ‘A Balrog! A Balrog is come!’
Gimli stared with wide eyes. ‘Durin’s Bane!’ he cried, and letting
his axe fall he covered his face.
‘A Balrog,’ muttered Gandalf. ‘Now I understand.’ He faltered
and leaned heavily on his staff. ‘What an evil fortune! And I am
already weary.’
The dark ﬁgure streaming with ﬁre raced towards them. The orcs
yelled and poured over the stone gangways. Then Boromir raised his
horn and blew. Loud the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout
of many throats under the cavernous roof. For a moment the orcs
quailed and the ﬁery shadow halted. Then the echoes died as suddenly as a ﬂame blown out by a dark wind, and the enemy advanced
again.
‘Over the bridge!’ cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. ‘Fly! This
is a foe beyond any of you. I must hold the narrow way. Fly!’ Aragorn
and Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground,
side by side, behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others
halted just within the doorway at the hall’s end, and turned, unable
to leave their leader to face the enemy alone.
The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of
the span, leaning on the staff in his left hand, but in his other hand
Glamdring gleamed, cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing
him, and the shadow about it reached out like two vast wings. It
raised the whip, and the thongs whined and cracked. Fire came from
its nostrils. But Gandalf stood ﬁrm.
‘You cannot pass,’ he said. The orcs stood still, and a dead silence
fell. ‘I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the ﬂame of Anor.
You cannot pass. The dark ﬁre will not avail you, ﬂame of Udûn.
Go back to the Shadow! You cannot pass.’
The Balrog made no answer. The ﬁre in it seemed to die, but the
darkness grew. It stepped forward slowly on to the bridge, and suddenly it drew itself up to a great height, and its wings were spread
from wall to wall; but still Gandalf could be seen, glimmering in the
gloom; he seemed small, and altogether alone: grey and bent, like a
wizened tree before the onset of a storm.
From out of the shadow a red sword leaped ﬂaming.
Glamdring glittered white in answer.
There was a ringing clash and a stab of white ﬁre. The Balrog fell
back, and its sword ﬂew up in molten fragments. The wizard swayed
on the bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still.
‘You cannot pass!’ he said.
With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge. Its whip
whirled and hissed.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

331

‘He cannot stand alone!’ cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back
along the bridge. ‘Elendil! ’ he shouted. ‘I am with you, Gandalf !’
‘Gondor!’ cried Boromir and leaped after him.
At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote
the bridge before him. The staff broke asunder and fell from his
hand. A blinding sheet of white ﬂame sprang up. The bridge cracked.
Right at the Balrog’s feet it broke, and the stone upon which it stood
crashed into the gulf, while the rest remained, poised, quivering like
a tongue of rock thrust out into emptiness.
With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow plunged
down and vanished. But even as it fell it swung its whip, and the
thongs lashed and curled about the wizard’s knees, dragging him to
the brink. He staggered and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid
into the abyss. ‘Fly, you fools!’ he cried, and was gone.
The ﬁres went out, and blank darkness fell. The Company stood
rooted with horror staring into the pit. Even as Aragorn and Boromir
came ﬂying back, the rest of the bridge cracked and fell. With a cry
Aragorn roused them.
‘Come! I will lead you now!’ he called. ‘We must obey his last
command. Follow me!’
They stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door, Aragorn
leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide echoing passage.
Along this they ﬂed. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then
he found that he himself was weeping as he ran. Doom, doom, doom
the drum-beats rolled behind, mournful now and slow; doom!
They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the
roof. They ran swifter. They passed into a hall, bright with daylight
from its high windows in the east. They ﬂed across it. Through its
huge broken doors they passed, and suddenly before them the Great
Gates opened, an arch of blazing light.
There was a guard of orcs crouching in the shadows behind the great
door-posts towering on either side, but the gates were shattered and
cast down. Aragorn smote to the ground the captain that stood in his
path, and the rest ﬂed in terror of his wrath. The Company swept past
them and took no heed of them. Out of the Gates they ran and sprang
down the huge and age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria.
Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the
wind on their faces.
They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the walls.
Dimrill Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains
lay upon it, but eastwards there was a golden light on the land. It
was but one hour after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were
white and high.

332

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

They looked back. Dark yawned the archway of the Gates under
the mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow
drum-beats: doom. A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was
to be seen; the dale all around was empty. Doom. Grief at last wholly
overcame them, and they wept long: some standing and silent, some
cast upon the ground. Doom, doom. The drum-beats faded.

Chapter 6
´ RIEN
LOTHLO
‘Alas! I fear we cannot stay here longer,’ said Aragorn. He looked
towards the mountains and held up his sword. ‘Farewell, Gandalf !’
he cried. ‘Did I not say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware?
Alas that I spoke true! What hope have we without you?’
He turned to the Company. ‘We must do without hope,’ he said.
‘At least we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no
more! Come! We have a long road, and much to do.’
They rose and looked about them. Northward the dale ran up
into a glen of shadows between two great arms of the mountains,
above which three white peaks were shining: Celebdil, Fanuidhol,
Caradhras, the Mountains of Moria. At the head of the glen a torrent
ﬂowed like a white lace over an endless ladder of short falls, and a
mist of foam hung in the air about the mountains’ feet.
‘Yonder is the Dimrill Stair,’ said Aragorn, pointing to the falls.
‘Down the deep-cloven way that climbs beside the torrent we should
have come, if fortune had been kinder.’
‘Or Caradhras less cruel,’ said Gimli. ‘There he stands smiling in
the sun!’ He shook his ﬁst at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks
and turned away.
To the east the outﬂung arm of the mountains marched to a
sudden end, and far lands could be descried beyond them, wide and
vague. To the south the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far
as sight could reach. Less than a mile away, and a little below them,
for they still stood high up on the west side of the dale, there lay a
mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a great spear-head thrust
deep into the northern glen; but its southern end was beyond the
shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a deep blue
like clear evening sky seen from a lamp-lit room. Its face was still
and unrufﬂed. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all
sides to its bare unbroken rim.
‘There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zâram!’ said Gimli sadly.
‘I remember that he said: ‘‘May you have joy of the sight! But we
cannot linger there.’’ Now long shall I journey ere I have joy again.
It is I that must hasten away, and he that must remain.’
The Company now went down the road from the Gates. It was
rough and broken, fading to a winding track between heather and
whin that thrust amid the cracking stones. But still it could be seen

334

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

that once long ago a great paved way had wound upwards from the
lowlands to the Dwarf-kingdom. In places there were ruined works
of stone beside the path, and mounds of green topped with slender
birches, or ﬁr-trees sighing in the wind. An eastward bend led them
hard by the sward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the roadside
stood a single column broken at the top.
‘That is Durin’s Stone!’ cried Gimli. ‘I cannot pass without turning
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale!’
‘Be swift then!’ said Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.
‘The Sun sinks early. The Orcs will not, maybe, come out till after
dusk, but we must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost
spent, and it will be dark tonight.’
‘Come with me, Frodo!’ cried the dwarf, springing from the road.
‘I would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zâram.’ He ran down
the long green slope. Frodo followed slowly, drawn by the still blue
water in spite of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind.
Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It was
cracked and weather-worn, and the faint runes upon its side could
not be read. ‘This pillar marks the spot where Durin ﬁrst looked in
the Mirrormere,’ said the dwarf. ‘Let us look ourselves once, ere
we go!’
They stooped over the dark water. At ﬁrst they could see nothing.
Then slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored
in a profound blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white ﬂame
above them; beyond there was a space of sky. There like jewels sunk
in the deep shone glinting stars, though sunlight was in the sky above.
Of their own stooping forms no shadow could be seen.
‘O Kheled-zâram fair and wonderful!’ said Gimli. ‘There lies the
Crown of Durin till he wakes. Farewell!’ He bowed, and turned away,
and hastened back up the greensward to the road again.
‘What did you see?’ said Pippin to Sam, but Sam was too deep in
thought to answer.
The road now turned south and went quickly downwards, running
out from between the arms of the dale. Some way below the mere
they came on a deep well of water, clear as crystal, from which a
freshet fell over a stone lip and ran glistening and gurgling down a
steep rocky channel.
‘Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises,’ said Gimli.
‘Do not drink of it! It is icy cold.’
‘Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many
other mountain-streams,’ said Aragorn. ‘Our road leads beside it for
many miles. For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose, and
ﬁrst I hope to come to the woods where the Silverlode ﬂows into the

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

335

Great River – out yonder.’ They looked as he pointed, and before
them they could see the stream leaping down to the trough of the
valley, and then running on and away into the lower lands, until it
was lost in a golden haze.
‘There lie the woods of Lothlórien!’ said Legolas. ‘That is the
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the
trees of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn
to gold. Not till the spring comes and the new green opens do they
fall, and then the boughs are laden with yellow ﬂowers; and the ﬂoor
of the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillars are of
silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs
in Mirkwood say. My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves
of that wood, and it were springtime!’
‘My heart will be glad, even in the winter,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it
lies many miles away. Let us hasten!’
For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the
others; but Aragorn was leading them at a great pace, and after a
while they lagged behind. They had eaten nothing since the early
morning. Sam’s cut was burning like ﬁre, and his head felt light. In
spite of the shining sun the wind seemed chill after the warm darkness
of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt every step more painful and he
gasped for breath.
At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind, he spoke
to Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to
Boromir to come with him.
‘I am sorry, Frodo!’ he cried, full of concern. ‘So much has happened this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten
that you were hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have
done nothing to ease you, as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria
were after us. Come now! A little further on there is a place where
we can rest for a little. There I will do what I can for you. Come,
Boromir! We will carry them.’
Soon afterwards they came upon another stream that ran down
from the west, and joined its bubbling water with the hurrying
Silverlode. Together they plunged over a fall of green-hued stone,
and foamed down into a dell. About it stood ﬁr-trees, short and bent,
and its sides were steep and clothed with harts-tongue and shrubs of
whortle-berry. At the bottom there was a level space through which
the stream ﬂowed noisily over shining pebbles. Here they rested. It
was now nearly three hours after noon, and they had come only a
few miles from the Gates. Already the sun was westering.
While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a ﬁre of brushand ﬁr-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam’s

336

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

wound was not deep, but it looked ugly, and Aragorn’s face was
grave as he examined it. After a moment he looked up with relief.
‘Good luck, Sam!’ he said. ‘Many have received worse than this
in payment for the slaying of their ﬁrst orc. The cut is not poisoned,
as the wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should heal well when
I have tended it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.’
He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves. ‘They
are dry, and some of their virtue has gone,’ he said, ‘but here I have
still some of the leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weathertop.
Crush one in the water, and wash the wound clean, and I will bind
it. Now it is your turn, Frodo!’
‘I am all right,’ said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments touched.
‘All I needed was some food and a little rest.’
‘No!’ said Aragorn. ‘We must have a look and see what the hammer
and the anvil have done to you. I still marvel that you are alive at
all.’ Gently he stripped off Frodo’s old jacket and worn tunic, and
gave a gasp of wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered before his eyes like the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully
he took it off and held it up, and the gems on it glittered like stars,
and the sound of the shaken rings was like the tinkle of rain in a
pool.
‘Look, my friends!’ he called. ‘Here’s a pretty hobbit-skin to wrap
an elven-princeling in! If it were known that hobbits had such hides,
all the hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.’
‘And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in
vain,’ said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. ‘It is a mithril-coat.
Mithril! I have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat
that Gandalf spoke of ? Then he undervalued it. But it was well
given!’
‘I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close
in his little room,’ said Merry. ‘Bless the old hobbit! I love him more
than ever. I hope we get a chance of telling him about it!’
There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo’s right side and
breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one
point the rings had been driven through it into the ﬂesh. Frodo’s left
side also was scored and bruised where he had been hurled against
the wall. While the others set the food ready, Aragorn bathed the
hurts with water in which athelas was steeped. The pungent fragrance
ﬁlled the dell, and all those who stooped over the steaming water felt
refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the pain leave him, and
his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and sore to the touch for
many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.
‘The mail is marvellously light,’ he said. ‘Put it on again, if you
can bear it. My heart is glad to know that you have such a coat. Do

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

337

not lay it aside, even in sleep, unless fortune brings you where you
are safe for a while; and that will seldom chance while your quest
lasts.’
When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They put
out the ﬁre and hid all traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell
they took to the road again. They had not gone far before the sun
sank behind the westward heights and great shadows crept down the
mountain-sides. Dusk veiled their feet, and mist rose in the hollows.
Away in the east the evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of
distant plain and wood. Sam and Frodo now feeling eased and greatly
refreshed were able to go at a fair pace, and with only one brief halt
Aragorn led the Company on for nearly three more hours.
It was dark. Deep night had fallen. There were many clear stars,
but the fast-waning moon would not be seen till late. Gimli and
Frodo were at the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for
any sound upon the road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence.
‘Not a sound but the wind,’ he said. ‘There are no goblins near,
or my ears are made of wood. It is to be hoped that the Orcs will be
content with driving us from Moria. And maybe that was all their
purpose, and they had nothing else to do with us – with the Ring.
Though Orcs will often pursue foes for many leagues into the plain,
if they have a fallen captain to avenge.’
Frodo did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade was dull.
Yet he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon as the
shadows had fallen about them and the road behind was dim, he had
heard again the quick patter of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned
swiftly. There were two tiny gleams of light behind, or for a moment
he thought he saw them, but at once they slipped aside and vanished.
‘What is it?’ said the dwarf.
‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I thought I heard feet, and I
thought I saw a light – like eyes. I have thought so often, since we
ﬁrst entered Moria.’
Gimli halted and stooped to the ground. ‘I hear nothing but the
night-speech of plant and stone,’ he said. ‘Come! Let us hurry! The
others are out of sight.’
The night-wind blew chill up the valley to meet them. Before them
a wide grey shadow loomed, and they heard an endless rustle of
leaves like poplars in the breeze.
‘Lothlórien!’ cried Legolas. ‘Lothlórien! We have come to the eaves
of the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter!’
Under the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the
road and stream that ran suddenly beneath their spreading boughs.

338

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

In the dim light of the stars their stems were grey, and their quivering
leaves a hint of fallow gold.
‘Lothlórien!’ said Aragorn. ‘Glad I am to hear again the wind in
the trees! We are still little more than ﬁve leagues from the Gates,
but we can go no further. Here let us hope that the virtue of the
Elves will keep us tonight from the peril that comes behind.’
‘If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,’ said Gimli.
‘It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the
land whence we wandered in ages long ago,’ said Legolas, ‘but we
hear that Lórien is not yet deserted, for there is a secret power here
that holds evil from the land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen,
and maybe they dwell now deep in the woods and far from the
northern border.’
‘Indeed deep in the wood they dwell,’ said Aragorn, and sighed
as if some memory stirred in him. ‘We must fend for ourselves tonight.
We will go forward a short way, until the trees are all about us, and
then we will turn aside from the path and seek a place to rest in.’
He stepped forward; but Boromir stood irresolute and did not
follow. ‘Is there no other way?’ he said.
‘What other fairer way would you desire?’ said Aragorn.
‘A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,’ said
Boromir. ‘By strange paths has this Company been led, and so far
to evil fortune. Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria,
to our loss. And now we must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But
of that perilous land we have heard in Gondor, and it is said that
few come out who once go in; and of that few none have escaped
unscathed.’
‘Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe you will
speak the truth,’ said Aragorn. ‘But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir,
if in the city of those who once were wise they now speak evil of
Lothlórien. Believe what you will, there is no other way for us – unless
you would go back to Moria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or
swim the Great River all alone.’
‘Then lead on!’ said Boromir. ‘But it is perilous.’
‘Perilous indeed,’ said Aragorn, ‘fair and perilous; but only evil
need fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me!’
They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when they
came upon another stream ﬂowing down swiftly from the tree-clad
slopes that climbed back westward towards the mountains. They
heard it splashing over a fall away among the shadows on their right.
Its dark hurrying waters ran across the path before them, and joined
the Silverlode in a swirl of dim pools among the roots of trees.
‘Here is Nimrodel!’ said Legolas. ‘Of this stream the Silvan Elves

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

339

made many songs long ago, and still we sing them in the North,
remembering the rainbow on its falls, and the golden ﬂowers that
ﬂoated in its foam. All is dark now and the Bridge of Nimrodel is
broken down. I will bathe my feet, for it is said that the water is
healing to the weary.’ He went forward and climbed down the deepcloven bank and stepped into the stream.
‘Follow me!’ he cried. ‘The water is not deep. Let us wade across!
On the further bank we can rest, and the sound of the falling water
may bring us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.’
One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas. For a
moment Frodo stood near the brink and let the water ﬂow over his
tired feet. It was cold but its touch was clean, and as he went on and
it mounted to his knees, he felt that the stain of travel and all weariness
was washed from his limbs.
When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate
a little food; and Legolas told them tales of Lothlórien that the Elves
of Mirkwood still kept in their hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon
the meadows by the Great River before the world was grey.
At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the waterfall
running sweetly in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he could
hear a voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water.
‘Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel?’ asked Legolas. ‘I will sing
you a song of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same name as the
stream beside which she lived long ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this is how it runs in the Westron Speech, as some
in Rivendell now sing it.’ In a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the
rustle of the leaves above them he began:
An Elven-maid there was of old,
A shining star by day:
Her mantle white was hemmed with gold,
Her shoes of silver-grey.
A star was bound upon her brows,
A light was on her hair
As sun upon the golden boughs
In Lórien the fair.
Her hair was long, her limbs were white,
And fair she was and free;
And in the wind she went as light
As leaf of linden-tree.

340

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Beside the falls of Nimrodel,
By water clear and cool,
Her voice as falling silver fell
Into the shining pool.
Where now she wanders none can tell,
In sunlight or in shade;
For lost of yore was Nimrodel
And in the mountains strayed.
The elven-ship in haven grey
Beneath the mountain-lee
Awaited her for many a day
Beside the roaring sea.
A wind by night in Northern lands
Arose, and loud it cried,
And drove the ship from elven-strands
Across the streaming tide.
When dawn came dim the land was lost,
The mountains sinking grey
Beyond the heaving waves that tossed
Their plumes of blinding spray.
Amroth beheld the fading shore
Now low beyond the swell,
And cursed the faithless ship that bore
Him far from Nimrodel.
Of old he was an Elven-king,
A lord of tree and glen,
When golden were the boughs in spring
In fair Lothlórien.
From helm to sea they saw him leap,
As arrow from the string,
And dive into the water deep,
As mew upon the wing.
The wind was in his ﬂowing hair,
The foam about him shone;
Afar they saw him strong and fair
Go riding like a swan.

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

341

But from the West has come no word,
And on the Hither Shore
No tidings Elven-folk have heard
Of Amroth evermore.
The voice of Legolas faltered, and the song ceased. ‘I cannot sing
any more,’ he said. ‘That is but a part, for I have forgotten much. It
is long and sad, for it tells how sorrow came upon Lothlórien, Lórien
of the Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.’
‘But the Dwarves did not make the evil,’ said Gimli.
‘I said not so; yet evil came,’ answered Legolas sadly. ‘Then many
of the Elves of Nimrodel’s kindred left their dwellings and departed,
and she was lost far in the South, in the passes of the White Mountains; and she came not to the ship where Amroth her lover waited
for her. But in the spring when the wind is in the new leaves the
echo of her voice may still be heard by the falls that bear her name.
And when the wind is in the South the voice of Amroth comes
up from the sea; for Nimrodel ﬂows into Silverlode, that Elves call
Celebrant, and Celebrant into Anduin the Great, and Anduin ﬂows
into the Bay of Belfalas whence the Elves of Lórien set sail. But
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth came ever back.
‘It is told that she had a house built in the branches of a tree that
grew near the falls; for that was the custom of the Elves of Lórien,
to dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Therefore they were
called the Galadhrim, the Tree-people. Deep in their forest the trees
are very great. The people of the woods did not delve in the ground
like Dwarves, nor build strong places of stone before the Shadow
came.’
‘And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might be
thought safer than sitting on the ground,’ said Gimli. He looked
across the stream to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then
up into the roof of dark boughs above.
‘Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,’ said Aragorn. ‘We cannot
build a house, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek
refuge in the tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside the road
already longer than was wise.’
The Company now turned aside from the path, and went into the
shadow of the deeper woods, westward along the mountain-stream
away from Silverlode. Not far from the falls of Nimrodel they found
a cluster of trees, some of which overhung the stream. Their great grey
trunks were of mighty girth, but their height could not be guessed.
‘I will climb up,’ said Legolas. ‘I am at home among trees, by root
or bough, though these trees are of a kind strange to me, save as a

342

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

name in song. Mellyrn they are called, and are those that bear the
yellow blossom, but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what
is their shape and way of growth.’
‘Whatever it may be,’ said Pippin, ‘they will be marvellous trees
indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot
sleep on a perch!’
‘Then dig a hole in the ground,’ said Legolas, ‘if that is more after
the fashion of your kind. But you must dig swift and deep, if you
wish to hide from Orcs.’ He sprang lightly up from the ground and
caught a branch that grew from the trunk high above his head. But
even as he swung there for a moment, a voice spoke suddenly from
the tree-shadows above him.
‘Daro!’ it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to
earth in surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree.
‘Stand still!’ he whispered to the others. ‘Do not move or speak!’
There was a sound of soft laughter over their heads, and then
another clear voice spoke in an elven-tongue. Frodo could understand
little of what was said, for the speech that the Silvan folk east of
the mountains used among themselves was unlike that of the West.
Legolas looked up and answered in the same language.*
‘Who are they, and what do they say?’ asked Merry.
‘They’re Elves,’ said Sam. ‘Can’t you hear their voices?’
‘Yes, they are Elves,’ said Legolas; ‘and they say that you breathe
so loud that they could shoot you in the dark.’ Sam hastily put his
hand over his mouth. ‘But they say also that you need have no fear.
They have been aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice
across the Nimrodel, and knew that I was one of their Northern
kindred, and therefore they did not hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me climb up with Frodo;
for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of our journey.
The others they ask to wait a little, and to keep watch at the foot of
the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.’
Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of rope,
silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it looked slender
it proved strong enough to bear many men. Legolas ran lightly up,
and Frodo followed slowly; behind came Sam trying not to breathe
loudly. The branches of the mallorn-tree grew out nearly straight
from the trunk, and then swept upward; but near the top the main
stem divided into a crown of many boughs, and among these they
found that there had been built a wooden platform, or ﬂet as such
things were called in those days: the Elves called it a talan. It was
* See note in Appendix F: Of the Elves.

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

343

reached by a round hole in the centre through which the ladder
passed.
When Frodo came at last up on to the ﬂet he found Legolas seated
with three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy-grey, and could
not be seen among the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They
stood up, and one of them uncovered a small lamp that gave out a
slender silver beam. He held it up, looking at Frodo’s face, and Sam’s.
Then he shut off the light again, and spoke words of welcome in his
elven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in return.
‘Welcome!’ the Elf then said again in the Common Language,
speaking slowly. ‘We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we
dwell now in the heart of the forest, and do not willingly have dealings
with any other folk. Even our own kindred in the North are sundered
from us. But there are some of us still who go abroad for the gathering
of news and the watching of our enemies, and they speak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my name. My brothers,
Rúmil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue.
‘But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers
of Elrond passed by Lórien on their way home up the Dimrill Stair.
We had not heard of – hobbits, of halﬂings, for many a long year,
and did not know that any yet dwelt in Middle-earth. You do not
look evil! And since you come with an Elf of our kindred, we are
willing to befriend you, as Elrond asked; though it is not our custom
to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here tonight.
How many are you?’
‘Eight,’ said Legolas. ‘Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of
whom, Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.’
‘The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lórien,’ said
Haldir, ‘and he has the favour of the Lady. All then is well. But you
have yet spoken only of seven.’
‘The eighth is a dwarf,’ said Legolas.
‘A dwarf !’ said Haldir. ‘That is not well. We have not had dealings
with the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in
our land. I cannot allow him to pass.’
‘But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dáin’s trusty people,
and friendly to Elrond,’ said Frodo. ‘Elrond himself chose him to be
one of our companions, and he has been brave and faithful.’
The Elves spoke together in soft voices, and questioned Legolas
in their own tongue. ‘Very good,’ said Haldir at last. ‘We will do
this, though it is against our liking. If Aragorn and Legolas will guard
him, and answer for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold
through Lothlórien.
‘But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not remain
on the ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since

344

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

we saw a great troop of Orcs going north towards Moria, along the
skirts of the mountains, many days ago. Wolves are howling on the
wood’s borders. If you have indeed come from Moria, the peril cannot
be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go on.
‘The four hobbits shall climb up here and stay with us – we do
not fear them! There is another talan in the next tree. There the
others must take refuge. You, Legolas, must answer to us for them.
Call us, if anything is amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf !’
Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir’s message;
and soon afterwards Merry and Pippin clambered up on to the high
ﬂet. They were out of breath and seemed rather scared.
‘There!’ said Merry panting. ‘We have lugged up your blankets as
well as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of our baggage in a
deep drift of leaves.’
‘You had no need of your burdens,’ said Haldir. ‘It is cold in the
tree-tops in winter, though the wind tonight is in the South; but we
have food and drink to give you that will drive away the night-chill,
and we have skins and cloaks to spare.’
The hobbits accepted this second (and far better) supper very
gladly. Then they wrapped themselves warmly, not only in the furcloaks of the Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and tried to
go to sleep. But weary as they were only Sam found that easy to do.
Hobbits do not like heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when
they have any stairs. The ﬂet was not at all to their liking as a bedroom.
It had no walls, not even a rail; only on one side was there a light
plaited screen, which could be moved and ﬁxed in different places
according to the wind.
Pippin went on talking for a while. ‘I hope, if I do go to sleep in
this bird-loft, that I shan’t roll off,’ he said.
‘Once I do get to sleep,’ said Sam, ‘I shall go on sleeping, whether
I roll off or no. And the less said, the sooner I’ll drop off, if you take
my meaning.’
Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked up at the stars glinting
through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his side
long before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see the grey
forms of two elves sitting motionless with their arms about their
knees, speaking in whispers. The other had gone down to take up
his watch on one of the lower branches. At last lulled by the wind
in the boughs above, and the sweet murmur of the falls of Nimrodel
below, Frodo fell asleep with the song of Legolas running in his mind.
Late in the night he woke. The other hobbits were asleep. The
Elves were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

345

leaves. The wind was still. A little way off he heard a harsh laugh
and the tread of many feet on the ground below. There was a ring
of metal. The sounds died slowly away, and seemed to go southward,
on into the wood.
A head appeared suddenly through the hole in the ﬂet. Frodo sat
up in alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards
the hobbits.
‘What is it?’ said Frodo.
‘Yrch!’ said the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the ﬂet the
rope-ladder rolled up.
‘Orcs!’ said Frodo. ‘What are they doing?’ But the Elf had gone.
There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent, and the
very falls seemed to be hushed. Frodo sat and shivered in his wraps.
He was thankful that they had not been caught on the ground; but
he felt that the trees offered little protection, except concealment.
Orcs were as keen as hounds on a scent, it was said, but they could
also climb. He drew out Sting: it ﬂashed and glittered like a blue
ﬂame; and then slowly faded again and grew dull. In spite of the
fading of his sword the feeling of immediate danger did not leave
Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and crawled to the opening
and peered down. He was almost certain that he could hear stealthy
movements at the tree’s foot far below.
Not Elves; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless in their
movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like snifﬁng; and something seemed to be scrabbling on the bark of the tree-trunk. He stared
down into the dark, holding his breath.
Something was now climbing slowly, and its breath came like a
soft hissing through closed teeth. Then coming up, close to the stem,
Frodo saw two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking.
Suddenly they turned away, and a shadowy ﬁgure slipped round the
trunk of the tree and vanished.
Immediately afterwards Haldir came climbing swiftly up through
the branches. ‘There was something in this tree that I have never
seen before,’ he said. ‘It was not an orc. It ﬂed as soon as I touched
the tree-stem. It seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees,
or I might have thought that it was one of you hobbits.
‘I did not shoot, for I dared not arouse any cries: we cannot
risk battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They crossed the
Nimrodel – curse their foul feet in its clean water! – and went on
down the old road beside the river. They seemed to pick up some
scent, and they searched the ground for a while near the place where
you halted. The three of us could not challenge a hundred, so we
went ahead and spoke with feigned voices, leading them on into the
wood.

346

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Orophin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to warn
our people. None of the Orcs will ever return out of Lórien. And
there will be many Elves hidden on the northern border before
another night falls. But you must take the road south as soon as it
is fully light.’
Day came pale from the East. As the light grew it ﬁltered through
the yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to the hobbits that
the early sun of a cool summer’s morning was shining. Pale-blue sky
peeped among the moving branches. Looking through an opening
on the south side of the ﬂet Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode
lying like a sea of fallow gold tossing gently in the breeze.
The morning was still young and cold when the Company set out
again, guided now by Haldir and his brother Rúmil. ‘Farewell, sweet
Nimrodel!’ cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and caught a gleam of
white foam among the grey tree-stems. ‘Farewell,’ he said. It seemed
to him that he would never hear again a running water so beautiful,
for ever blending its innumerable notes in an endless changeful music.
They went back to the path that still went on along the west side
of the Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There
were the prints of orc-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside
into the trees and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows.
‘There is one of my people yonder across the stream,’ he said,
‘though you may not see him.’ He gave a call like the low whistle of
a bird, and out of a thicket of young trees an Elf stepped, clad in
grey, but with his hood thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the
morning sun. Haldir skilfully cast over the stream a coil of grey rope,
and he caught it and bound the end about a tree near the bank.
‘Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see,’ said Haldir,
‘and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We do not set foot
in it so far north, unless we must. But in these days of watchfulness
we do not make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!’ He made
his end of the rope fast about another tree, and then ran lightly along
it, over the river and back again, as if he were on a road.
‘I can walk this path,’ said Legolas; ‘but the others have not this
skill. Must they swim?’
‘No!’ said Haldir. ‘We have two more ropes. We will fasten them
above the other, one shoulder-high, and another half-high, and holding these the strangers should be able to cross with care.’
When this slender bridge had been made, the Company passed
over, some cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of the hobbits
Pippin proved the best for he was sure-footed, and he walked over
quickly, holding only with one hand; but he kept his eyes on the
bank ahead and did not look down. Sam shufﬂed along, clutching

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

347

hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water as if it was a
chasm in the mountains.
He breathed with relief when he was safely across. ‘Live and learn!
as my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening, not
of roosting like a bird, nor of trying to walk like a spider. Not even
my uncle Andy ever did a trick like that!’
When at length all the Company was gathered on the east bank
of the Silverlode, the Elves untied the ropes and coiled two of them.
Rúmil, who had remained on the other side, drew back the last one,
slung it on his shoulder, and with a wave of his hand went away,
back to Nimrodel to keep watch.
‘Now, friends,’ said Haldir, ‘you have entered the Naith of Lórien,
or the Gore, as you would say, for it is the land that lies like a
spearhead between the arms of Silverlode and Anduin the Great. We
allow no strangers to spy out the secrets of the Naith. Few indeed
are permitted even to set foot there.
‘As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf.
The others may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our
dwellings, down in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters.’
This was not at all to the liking of Gimli. ‘The agreement was
made without my consent,’ he said. ‘I will not walk blindfold, like a
beggar or a prisoner. And I am no spy. My folk have never had
dealings with any of the servants of the Enemy. Neither have we
done harm to the Elves. I am no more likely to betray you than
Legolas, or any other of my companions.’
‘I do not doubt you,’ said Haldir. ‘Yet this is our law. I am not
the master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I have done much in
letting you set foot over Celebrant.’
Gimli was obstinate. He planted his feet ﬁrmly apart, and laid his
hand upon the haft of his axe. ‘I will go forward free,’ he said, ‘or I
will go back and seek my own land, where I am known to be true of
word, though I perish alone in the wilderness.’
‘You cannot go back,’ said Haldir sternly. ‘Now you have come
thus far, you must be brought before the Lord and the Lady. They
shall judge you, to hold you or to give you leave, as they will. You
cannot cross the rivers again, and behind you there are now secret
sentinels that you cannot pass. You would be slain before you saw
them.’
Gimli drew his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion bent
their bows. ‘A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks!’ said Legolas.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘If I am still to lead this Company, you
must do as I bid. It is hard upon the Dwarf to be thus singled out.
We will all be blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it
will make the journey slow and dull.’

348

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gimli laughed suddenly. ‘A merry troop of fools we shall look!
Will Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blind beggars with one
dog? But I will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.’
‘I am an Elf and a kinsman here,’ said Legolas, becoming angry
in his turn.
‘Now let us cry: ‘‘a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!’’ ’ said
Aragorn. ‘But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes,
Haldir!’
‘I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if you do
not lead us well,’ said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.
‘You will have no claim,’ said Haldir. ‘I shall lead you well, and
the paths are smooth and straight.’
‘Alas for the folly of these days!’ said Legolas. ‘Here all are enemies
of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry
in the woodland under leaves of gold!’
‘Folly it may seem,’ said Haldir. ‘Indeed in nothing is the power
of the Dark Lord more clearly shown than in the estrangement that
divides all those who still oppose him. Yet so little faith and trust do
we ﬁnd now in the world beyond Lothlórien, unless maybe in Rivendell, that we dare not by our own trust endanger our land. We live
now upon an island amid many perils, and our hands are more often
upon the bowstring than upon the harp.
‘The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more;
for the Shadow has crept northward all about us. Some speak of
departing, yet for that it already seems too late. The mountains to
the west are growing evil; to the east the lands are waste, and full of
Sauron’s creatures; and it is rumoured that we cannot now safely
pass southward through Rohan, and the mouths of the Great River
are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come to the shores of
the Sea, we should ﬁnd no longer any shelter there. It is said that
there are still havens of the High Elves, but they are far north and
west, beyond the land of the Halﬂings. But where that may be, though
the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.’
‘You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,’ said Merry.
‘There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire, where Hobbits
live.’
‘Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the sea!’ said
Haldir. ‘It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet
still we remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.’
‘I cannot,’ said Merry. ‘I have never seen them. I have never been
out of my own land before. And if I had known what the world
outside was like, I don’t think I should have had the heart to leave
it.’
‘Not even to see fair Lothlórien?’ said Haldir. ‘The world is indeed

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

349

full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; but still there is
much that is fair, and though in all lands love is now mingled with
grief, it grows perhaps the greater.
‘Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will draw
back, and peace shall come again. Yet I do not believe that the world
about us will ever again be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun
as it was aforetime. For the Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a
truce, in which they may pass to the Sea unhindered and leave the
Middle-earth for ever. Alas for Lothlórien that I love! It would be a
poor life in a land where no mallorn grew. But if there are mallorntrees beyond the Great Sea, none have reported it.’
As they spoke thus, the Company ﬁled slowly along the paths in
the wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They
felt the ground beneath their feet smooth and soft, and after a while
they walked more freely, without fear of hurt or fall. Being deprived
of sight, Frodo found his hearing and other senses sharpened. He
could smell the trees and the trodden grass. He could hear many
different notes in the rustle of the leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on his right, and the thin clear voices of birds high in the
sky. He felt the sun upon his face and hands when they passed
through an open glade.
As soon as he set foot upon the far bank of Silverlode a strange
feeling had come upon him, and it deepened as he walked on into
the Naith: it seemed to him that he had stepped over a bridge of
time into a corner of the Elder Days, and was now walking in a world
that was no more. In Rivendell there was memory of ancient things;
in Lórien the ancient things still lived on in the waking world. Evil
had been seen and heard there, sorrow had been known; the Elves
feared and distrusted the world outside: wolves were howling on the
wood’s borders: but on the land of Lórien no shadow lay.
All that day the Company marched on, until they felt the cool
evening come and heard the early night-wind whispering among
many leaves. Then they rested and slept without fear upon the
ground; for their guides would not permit them to unbind their eyes,
and they could not climb. In the morning they went on again, walking
without haste. At noon they halted, and Frodo was aware that they
had passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard the sound
of many voices all around him.
A marching host of Elves had come up silently: they were hastening
towards the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria;
and they brought news, some of which Haldir reported. The marauding orcs had been waylaid and almost all destroyed; the remnant had
ﬂed westward towards the mountains, and were being pursued. A

350

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

strange creature also had been seen, running with bent back and with
hands near the ground, like a beast and yet not of beast-shape. It
had eluded capture, and they had not shot it, not knowing whether
it was good or ill, and it had vanished down the Silverlode southward.
‘Also,’ said Haldir, ‘they bring me a message from the Lord and
Lady of the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf
Gimli. It seems that the Lady knows who and what is each member
of your Company. New messages have come from Rivendell perhaps.’
He removed the bandage ﬁrst from Gimli’s eyes. ‘Your pardon!’
he said, bowing low. ‘Look on us now with friendly eyes! Look and
be glad, for you are the ﬁrst dwarf to behold the trees of the Naith
of Lórien since Durin’s Day!’
When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked up and
caught his breath. They were standing in an open space. To the left
stood a great mound, covered with a sward of grass as green as
Springtime in the Elder Days. Upon it, as a double crown, grew two
circles of trees: the outer had bark of snowy white, and were leaﬂess
but beautiful in their shapely nakedness; the inner were mallorn-trees
of great height, still arrayed in pale gold. High amid the branches of
a towering tree that stood in the centre of all there gleamed a white
ﬂet. At the feet of the trees, and all about the green hillsides the grass
was studded with small golden ﬂowers shaped like stars. Among
them, nodding on slender stalks, were other ﬂowers, white and palest
green: they glimmered as a mist amid the rich hue of the grass. Over
all the sky was blue, and the sun of afternoon glowed upon the hill
and cast long green shadows beneath the trees.
‘Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,’ said Haldir. ‘For this
is the heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and here is the
mound of Amroth, where in happier days his high house was built.
Here ever bloom the winter ﬂowers in the unfading grass: the yellow
elanor, and the pale niphredil. Here we will stay awhile, and come to
the city of the Galadhrim at dusk.’
The others cast themselves down upon the fragrant grass, but
Frodo stood awhile still lost in wonder. It seemed to him that he had
stepped through a high window that looked on a vanished world. A
light was upon it for which his language had no name. All that he
saw was shapely, but the shapes seemed at once clear cut, as if they
had been ﬁrst conceived and drawn at the uncovering of his eyes,
and ancient as if they had endured for ever. He saw no colour but
those he knew, gold and white and blue and green, but they were
fresh and poignant, as if he had at that moment ﬁrst perceived them
and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter here no
heart could mourn for summer or for spring. No blemish or sickness

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

351

or deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth. On
the land of Lórien there was no stain.
He turned and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking
round with a puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as if he was not
sure that he was awake. ‘It’s sunlight and bright day, right enough,’ he
said. ‘I thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is
more Elvish than anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside
a song, if you take my meaning.’
Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning
of both thought and word. He smiled. ‘You feel the power of the
Lady of the Galadhrim,’ he said. ‘Would it please you to climb with
me up Cerin Amroth?’
They followed him as he stepped lightly up the grass-clad slopes.
Though he walked and breathed, and about him living leaves and
ﬂowers were stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo
felt that he was in a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall
into forgetfulness. When he had gone and passed again into the outer
world, still Frodo the wanderer from the Shire would walk there,
upon the grass among elanor and niphredil in fair Lothlórien.
They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the South
Wind blew upon Cerin Amroth and sighed among the branches.
Frodo stood still, hearing far off great seas upon beaches that had
long ago been washed away, and sea-birds crying whose race had
perished from the earth.
Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high ﬂet. As
Frodo prepared to follow him, he laid his hand upon the tree beside
the ladder: never before had he been so suddenly and so keenly aware
of the feel and texture of a tree’s skin and of the life within it. He
felt a delight in wood and the touch of it, neither as forester nor as
carpenter; it was the delight of the living tree itself.
As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his
hand and turned him towards the South. ‘Look this way ﬁrst!’ he
said.
Frodo looked and saw, still at some distance, a hill of many mighty
trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out
of it, it seemed to him that the power and light came that held all
the land in sway. He longed suddenly to ﬂy like a bird to rest in the
green city. Then he looked eastward and saw all the land of Lórien
running down to the pale gleam of Anduin, the Great River. He lifted
his eyes across the river and all the light went out, and he was back
again in the world he knew. Beyond the river the land appeared ﬂat
and empty, formless and vague, until far away it rose again like a
wall, dark and drear. The sun that lay on Lothlórien had no power
to enlighten the shadow of that distant height.

352

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,’ said Haldir. ‘It is
clad in a forest of dark ﬁr, where the trees strive one against another
and their branches rot and wither. In the midst upon a stony height
stands Dol Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling.
We fear that now it is inhabited again, and with power sevenfold. A
black cloud lies often over it of late. In this high place you may see
the two powers that are opposed one to another; and ever they strive
now in thought, but whereas the light perceives the very heart of the
darkness, its own secret has not been discovered. Not yet.’ He turned
and climbed swiftly down, and they followed him.
At the hill’s foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as
a tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a
light was in his eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as
Frodo looked at him he knew that he beheld things as they once had
been in this same place. For the grim years were removed from the
face of Aragorn, and he seemed clothed in white, a young lord tall
and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue to one whom Frodo
could not see. Arwen vanimelda, namárië! he said, and then he drew
a breath, and returning out of his thought he looked at Frodo and
smiled.
‘Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,’ he said, ‘and here my
heart dwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the dark roads that
we still must tread, you and I. Come with me!’ And taking Frodo’s
hand in his, he left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never
again as living man.

Chapter 7
THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL
The sun was sinking behind the mountains, and the shadows were
deepening in the woods, when they went on again. Their paths now
went into thickets where the dusk had already gathered. Night came
beneath the trees as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver
lamps.
Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves
under a pale evening sky pricked by a few early stars. There was a
wide treeless space before them, running in a great circle and bending
away on either hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow,
but the grass upon its brink was green, as if it glowed still in memory
of the sun that had gone. Upon the further side there rose to a great
height a green wall encircling a green hill thronged with mallorn-trees
taller than any they had yet seen in all the land. Their height could
not be guessed, but they stood up in the twilight like living towers.
In their many-tiered branches and amid their ever-moving leaves
countless lights were gleaming, green and gold and silver. Haldir
turned towards the Company.
‘Welcome to Caras Galadhon!’ he said. ‘Here is the city of the
Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel the Lady
of Lórien. But we cannot enter here, for the gates do not look northward. We must go round to the southern side, and the way is not
short, for the city is great.’
There was a road paved with white stone running on the outer
brink of the fosse. Along this they went westward, with the city ever
climbing up like a green cloud upon their left; and as the night
deepened more lights sprang forth, until all the hill seemed aﬁre with
stars. They came at last to a white bridge, and crossing found the
great gates of the city: they faced south-west, set between the ends
of the encircling wall that here overlapped, and they were tall and
strong, and hung with many lamps.
Haldir knocked and spoke, and the gates opened soundlessly; but
of guards Frodo could see no sign. The travellers passed within, and
the gates shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the
ends of the wall, and passing quickly through it they entered the City
of the Trees. No folk could they see, nor hear any feet upon the
paths; but there were many voices, about them, and in the air above.

354

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Far away up on the hill they could hear the sound of singing falling
from on high like soft rain upon leaves.
They went along many paths and climbed many stairs, until they
came to the high places and saw before them amid a wide lawn a
fountain shimmering. It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the
boughs of trees, and it fell into a basin of silver, from which a white
stream spilled. Upon the south side of the lawn there stood the
mightiest of all the trees; its great smooth bole gleamed like grey silk,
and up it towered, until its ﬁrst branches, far above, opened their
huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves. Beside it a broad white
ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were seated. They sprang
up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they were tall
and clad in grey mail, and from their shoulders hung long white
cloaks.
‘Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,’ said Haldir. ‘It is their wish
that you should ascend and speak with them.’
One of the Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn,
and it was answered three times from far above. ‘I will go ﬁrst,’ said
Haldir. ‘Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may
follow as they wish. It is a long climb for those that are not accustomed
to such stairs, but you may rest upon the way.’
As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many ﬂets: some on one
side, some on another, and some set about the bole of the tree, so
that the ladder passed through them. At a great height above the
ground he came to a wide talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it
was built a house, so large that almost it would have served for a hall
of Men upon the earth. He entered behind Haldir, and found that
he was in a chamber of oval shape, in the midst of which grew the
trunk of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its crown, and yet
making still a pillar of wide girth.
The chamber was ﬁlled with a soft light; its walls were green and
silver and its roof of gold. Many Elves were seated there. On two
chairs beneath the bole of the tree and canopied by a living bough
there sat, side by side, Celeborn and Galadriel. They stood up to
greet their guests, after the manner of Elves, even those who were
accounted mighty kings. Very tall they were, and the Lady no less
tall than the Lord; and they were grave and beautiful. They were
clad wholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of deep gold, and
the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright; but no
sign of age was upon them, unless it were in the depths of their eyes;
for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet profound, the
wells of deep memory.
Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him in his

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

355

own tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon
his face.
‘Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire!’ said Celeborn.
‘When all have come we will speak together.’
Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name as they
entered. ‘Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn!’ he said. ‘It is eight and
thirty years of the world outside since you came to this land; and
those years lie heavy on you. But the end is near, for good or ill.
Here lay aside your burden for a while!’
‘Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey
hither from the North.’
‘Welcome Gimli son of Glóin! It is long indeed since we saw one
of Durin’s folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our
long law. May it be a sign that though the world is now dark better
days are at hand, and that friendship shall be renewed between our
peoples.’ Gimli bowed low.
When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord looked
at them again. ‘Here there are eight,’ he said. ‘Nine were to set out:
so said the messages. But maybe there has been some change of
counsel that we have not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness
gathers between us, and all this year the shadows have grown longer.’
‘Nay, there was no change of counsel,’ said the Lady Galadriel,
speaking for the ﬁrst time. Her voice was clear and musical, but
deeper than woman’s wont. ‘Gandalf the Grey set out with the Company, but he did not pass the borders of this land. Now tell us where
he is; for I much desired to speak with him again. But I cannot see
him from afar, unless he comes within the fences of Lothlórien: a
grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and of his mind are
hidden from me.’
‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. He
remained in Moria and did not escape.’
At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief and
amazement. ‘These are evil tidings,’ said Celeborn, ‘the most evil
that have been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.’ He
turned to Haldir. ‘Why has nothing of this been told to me before?’
he asked in the elven-tongue.
‘We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,’ said
Legolas. ‘At ﬁrst we were weary and danger was too close behind;
and afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked
in gladness on the fair paths of Lórien.’
‘Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,’ said Frodo.
‘Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our
escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.’

356

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Tell us now the full tale!’ said Celeborn.
Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the pass of
Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he spoke of Balin and
his book, and the ﬁght in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the ﬁre,
and the narrow bridge, and the coming of the Terror. ‘An evil of the
Ancient World it seemed, such as I have never seen before,’ said
Aragorn. ‘It was both a shadow and a ﬂame, strong and terrible.’
‘It was a Balrog of Morgoth,’ said Legolas; ‘of all elf-banes the
most deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.’
‘Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest
dreams, I saw Durin’s Bane,’ said Gimli in a low voice, and dread
was in his eyes.
‘Alas!’ said Celeborn. ‘We long have feared that under Caradhras
a terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this
evil in Moria again, I would have forbidden you to pass the northern
borders, you and all that went with you. And if it were possible, one
would say that at the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going
needlessly into the net of Moria.’
‘He would be rash indeed that said that thing,’ said Galadriel
gravely. ‘Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those
that followed him knew not his mind and cannot report his full
purpose. But however it may be with the guide, the followers are
blameless. Do not repent of your welcome to the Dwarf. If our folk
had been exiled long and far from Lothlórien, who of the Galadhrim,
even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not wish to look
upon their ancient home, though it had become an abode of dragons?
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram, and cold are the springs of
Kibil-nâla, and fair were the many-pillared halls of Khazad-dûm in
Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings beneath the stone.’ She
looked upon Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And
the Dwarf, hearing the names given in his own ancient tongue, looked
up and met her eyes; and it seemed to him that he looked suddenly
into the heart of an enemy and saw there love and understanding.
Wonder came into his face, and then he smiled in answer.
He rose clumsily and bowed in dwarf-fashion, saying: ‘Yet more
fair is the living land of Lórien, and the Lady Galadriel is above all
the jewels that lie beneath the earth!’
There was a silence. At length Celeborn spoke again. ‘I did not
know that your plight was so evil,’ he said. ‘Let Gimli forget my
harsh words: I spoke in the trouble of my heart. I will do what I can
to aid you, each according to his wish and need, but especially that
one of the little folk who bears the burden.’
‘Your quest is known to us,’ said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. ‘But

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

357

we will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove,
maybe, that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself
plainly purposed. For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the
wisest of the Elves of Middle-earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the
power of kings. He has dwelt in the West since the days of dawn,
and I have dwelt with him years uncounted; for ere the fall of
Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the mountains, and together
through ages of the world we have fought the long defeat.
‘I it was who ﬁrst summoned the White Council. And if my designs
had not gone amiss, it would have been governed by Gandalf the
Grey, and then mayhap things would have gone otherwise. But even
now there is hope left. I will not give you counsel, saying do this, or
do that. For not in doing or contriving, nor in choosing between this
course and another, can I avail; but only in knowing what was and is,
and in part also what shall be. But this I will say to you: your Quest
stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray but a little and it will fail, to the
ruin of all. Yet hope remains while all the Company is true.’
And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silence
looked searchingly at each of them in turn. None save Legolas and
Aragorn could long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and
hung his head.
At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes, and
she smiled. ‘Do not let your hearts be troubled,’ she said. ‘Tonight
you shall sleep in peace.’ Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary,
as those who have been questioned long and deeply, though no words
had been spoken openly.
‘Go now!’ said Celeborn. ‘You are worn with sorrow and much
toil. Even if your Quest did not concern us closely, you should have
refuge in this City, until you were healed and refreshed. Now you
shall rest, and we will not speak of your further road for a while.’
That night the Company slept upon the ground, much to the
satisfaction of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion
among the trees near the fountain, and in it they laid soft couches;
then speaking words of peace with fair Elvish voices they left them.
For a little while the travellers talked of their night before in the
tree-tops, and of their day’s journey, and of the Lord and Lady; for
they had not yet the heart to look further back.
‘What did you blush for, Sam?’ said Pippin. ‘You soon broke
down. Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I
hope it was nothing worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my
blankets.’
‘I never thought no such thing,’ answered Sam, in no mood for
jest. ‘If you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothing on, and I

358

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

didn’t like it. She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me
what I would do if she gave me the chance of ﬂying back home to
the Shire to a nice little hole with – with a bit of garden of my own.’
‘That’s funny,’ said Merry. ‘Almost exactly what I felt myself;
only, only well, I don’t think I’ll say any more,’ he ended lamely.
All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that he was
offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and
something that he greatly desired: clear before his mind it lay, and
to get it he had only to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest
and the war against Sauron to others.
‘And it seemed to me, too,’ said Gimli, ‘that my choice would
remain secret and known only to myself.’
‘To me it seemed exceedingly strange,’ said Boromir. ‘Maybe it
was only a test, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own
good purpose; but almost I should have said that she was tempting
us, and offering what she pretended to have the power to give. It
need not be said that I refused to listen. The Men of Minas Tirith
are true to their word.’ But what he thought that the Lady had offered
him Boromir did not tell.
And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir pressed him
with questions. ‘She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,’ he said.
‘Yes,’ said Frodo; ‘but whatever came into my mind then I will
keep there.’
‘Well, have a care!’ said Boromir. ‘I do not feel too sure of this
Elvish Lady and her purposes.’
‘Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel!’ said Aragorn sternly. ‘You
know not what you say. There is in her and in this land no evil,
unless a man bring it hither himself. Then let him beware! But tonight
I shall sleep without fear for the ﬁrst time since I left Rivendell. And
may I sleep deep, and forget for a while my grief ! I am weary in body
and in heart.’ He cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once
into a long sleep.
The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream disturbed
their slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day was
broad upon the lawn before the pavilion, and the fountain rose and
fell glittering in the sun.
They remained some days in Lothlórien, so far as they could tell
or remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun shone clear,
save for a gentle rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all
things fresh and clean. The air was cool and soft, as if it were early
spring, yet they felt about them the deep and thoughtful quiet of
winter. It seemed to them that they did little but eat and drink and
rest, and walk among the trees; and it was enough.

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

359

They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had little
speech with the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or would use the
Westron tongue. Haldir had bidden them farewell and gone back
again to the fences of the North, where great watch was now kept
since the tidings of Moria that the Company had brought. Legolas
was away much among the Galadhrim, and after the ﬁrst night he
did not sleep with the other companions, though he returned to eat
and talk with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he went
abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change.
Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of
Gandalf, and all that each had known and seen of him came clear
before their minds. As they were healed of hurt and weariness of
body the grief of their loss grew more keen. Often they heard nearby
Elvish voices singing, and knew that they were making songs of lamentation for his fall, for they caught his name among the sweet sad
words that they could not understand.
Mithrandir, Mithrandir sang the Elves, O Pilgrim Grey! For so they
loved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Company, he would not
interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that
for him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for
song.
It was Frodo who ﬁrst put something of his sorrow into halting
words. He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Rivendell he had listened and had not sung himself, though his memory
was stored with many things that others had made before him. But
now as he sat beside the fountain in Lórien and heard about him the
voices of the Elves, his thought took shape in a song that seemed fair
to him; yet when he tried to repeat it to Sam only snatches remained,
faded as a handful of withered leaves.
When evening in the Shire was grey
his footsteps on the Hill were heard;
before the dawn he went away
on journey long without a word.
From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden door
and darkling woods he walked at will.
With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men,
with mortal and immortal folk,
with bird on bough and beast in den,
in their own secret tongues he spoke.

360

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

A deadly sword, a healing hand,
a back that bent beneath its load;
a trumpet-voice, a burning brand,
a weary pilgrim on the road.
A lord of wisdom throned he sat,
swift in anger, quick to laugh;
an old man in a battered hat
who leaned upon a thorny staff.
He stood upon the bridge alone
and Fire and Shadow both deﬁed;
his staff was broken on the stone,
in Khazad-dûm his wisdom died.
‘Why, you’ll be beating Mr. Bilbo next!’ said Sam.
‘No, I am afraid not,’ said Frodo. ‘But that is the best I can do
yet.’
‘Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you’ll say a
word about his ﬁreworks,’ said Sam. ‘Something like this:
The ﬁnest rockets ever seen:
they burst in stars of blue and green,
or after thunder golden showers
came falling like a rain of ﬂowers.
Though that doesn’t do them justice by a long road.’
‘No, I’ll leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But – well,
I can’t talk of it any more. I can’t bear to think of bringing the news
to him.’
One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool
twilight. Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenly the
shadow of parting had fallen: he knew somehow that the time was
very near when he must leave Lothlórien.
‘What do you think of Elves now, Sam?’ he said. ‘I asked you the
same question once before – it seems a very long while ago; but you
have seen more of them since then.’
‘I have indeed!’ said Sam. ‘And I reckon there’s Elves and Elves.
They’re all Elvish enough, but they’re not all the same. Now these
folk aren’t wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes
of us: they seem to belong here, more even than Hobbits do in the
Shire. Whether they’ve made the land, or the land’s made them, it’s
hard to say, if you take my meaning. It’s wonderfully quiet here.

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

361

Nothing seems to be going on, and nobody seems to want it to. If
there’s any magic about, it’s right down deep, where I can’t lay my
hands on it, in a manner of speaking.’
‘You can see and feel it everywhere,’ said Frodo.
‘Well,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t see nobody working it. No ﬁreworks
like poor old Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don’t see nothing
of the Lord and Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could
do some wonderful things, if she had a mind. I’d dearly love to see
some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo!’
‘I wouldn’t,’ said Frodo. ‘I am content. And I don’t miss Gandalf ’s
ﬁreworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his
voice.’
‘You’re right,’ said Sam. ‘And don’t think I’m ﬁnding fault. I’ve
often wanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales,
but I’ve never heard of a better land than this. It’s like being at home
and on a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don’t
want to leave. All the same, I’m beginning to feel that if we’ve got
to go on, then we’d best get it over.
‘It’s the job that’s never started as takes longest to ﬁnish, as my old
gaffer used to say. And I don’t reckon that these folk can do much
more to help us, magic or no. It’s when we leave this land that we
shall miss Gandalf worse, I’m thinking.’
‘I am afraid that’s only too true, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘Yet I hope
very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves
again.’
Even as he spoke, they saw, as if she came in answer to their
words, the Lady Galadriel approaching. Tall and white and fair she
walked beneath the trees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them.
Turning aside, she led them towards the southern slopes of the
hill of Caras Galadhon, and passing through a high green hedge they
came into an enclosed garden. No trees grew there, and it lay open
to the sky. The evening star had risen and was shining with white
ﬁre above the western woods. Down a long ﬂight of steps the Lady
went into the deep green hollow, through which ran murmuring the
silver stream that issued from the fountain on the hill. At the bottom,
upon a low pedestal carved like a branching tree, stood a basin of
silver, wide and shallow, and beside it stood a silver ewer.
With water from the stream Galadriel ﬁlled the basin to the brim,
and breathed on it, and when the water was still again she spoke.
‘Here is the Mirror of Galadriel,’ she said. ‘I have brought you here
so that you may look in it, if you will.’
The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the Elf-lady
beside him was tall and pale. ‘What shall we look for, and what shall
we see?’ asked Frodo, ﬁlled with awe.

362

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,’ she answered,
‘and to some I can show what they desire to see. But the Mirror will
also show things unbidden, and those are often stranger and more
proﬁtable than things which we wish to behold. What you will see,
if you leave the Mirror free to work, I cannot tell. For it shows things
that were, and things that are, and things that yet may be. But which
it is that he sees, even the wisest cannot always tell. Do you wish to
look?’
Frodo did not answer.
‘And you?’ she said, turning to Sam. ‘For this is what your folk
would call magic, I believe; though I do not understand clearly what
they mean; and they seem to use the same word of the deceits of the
Enemy. But this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not
say that you wished to see Elf-magic?’
‘I did,’ said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. ‘I’ll
have a peep, Lady, if you’re willing.
‘And I’d not mind a glimpse of what’s going on at home,’ he said
in an aside to Frodo. ‘It seems a terrible long time that I’ve been
away. But there, like as not I’ll only see the stars, or something that
I won’t understand.’
‘Like as not,’ said the Lady with a gentle laugh. ‘But come, you
shall look and see what you may. Do not touch the water!’
Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned over
the basin. The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reﬂected
in it.
‘There’s only stars, as I thought,’ he said. Then he gave a low
gasp, for the stars went out. As if a dark veil had been withdrawn,
the Mirror grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and
the branches of trees were waving and tossing in the wind. But before
Sam could make up his mind what it was that he saw, the light faded;
and now he thought he saw Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep
under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed to see himself going along
a dim passage, and climbing an endless winding stair. It came to him
suddenly that he was looking urgently for something, but what it was
he did not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went back, and
he saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and he
could see what was going on: they were not waving in the wind, they
were falling, crashing to the ground.
‘Hi!’ cried Sam in an outraged voice. ‘There’s that Ted Sandyman
a-cutting down trees as he shouldn’t. They didn’t ought to be felled:
it’s that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater.
I wish I could get at Ted, and I’d fell him!’
But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and a large
red-brick building was being put up where it had stood. Lots of folk

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

363

were busily at work. There was a tall red chimney nearby. Black
smoke seemed to cloud the surface of the Mirror.
‘There’s some devilry at work in the Shire,’ he said. ‘Elrond knew
what he was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.’ Then
suddenly Sam gave a cry and sprang away. ‘I can’t stay here,’ he said
wildly. ‘I must go home. They’ve dug up Bagshot Row, and there’s
the poor old Gaffer going down the Hill with his bits of things on a
barrow. I must go home!’
‘You cannot go home alone,’ said the Lady. ‘You did not wish to
go home without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and
yet you knew that evil things might well be happening in the Shire.
Remember that the Mirror shows many things, and not all have yet
come to pass. Some never come to be, unless those that behold the
visions turn aside from their path to prevent them. The Mirror is
dangerous as a guide of deeds.’
Sam sat on the ground and put his head in his hands. ‘I wish I
had never come here, and I don’t want to see no more magic,’
he said and fell silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly,
as if struggling with tears. ‘No, I’ll go home by the long road with
Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said. ‘But I hope I do get back some
day. If what I’ve seen turns out true, somebody’s going to catch it
hot!’
‘Do you now wish to look, Frodo?’ said the Lady Galadriel. ‘You
did not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.’
‘Do you advise me to look?’ asked Frodo.
‘No,’ she said. ‘I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am
not a counsellor. You may learn something, and whether what you
see be fair or evil, that may be proﬁtable, and yet it may not. Seeing
is both good and perilous. Yet I think, Frodo, that you have courage
and wisdom enough for the venture, or I would not have brought
you here. Do as you will!’
‘I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent
over the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and he saw a twilit
land. Mountains loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A
long grey road wound back out of sight. Far away a ﬁgure came
slowly down the road, faint and small at ﬁrst, but growing larger and
clearer as it approached. Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded
him of Gandalf. He almost called aloud the wizard’s name, and then
he saw that the ﬁgure was clothed not in grey but in white, in a white
that shone faintly in the dusk; and in its hand there was a white staff.
The head was so bowed that he could see no face, and presently the
ﬁgure turned aside round a bend in the road and went out of the
Mirror’s view. Doubt came into Frodo’s mind: was this a vision of

364

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gandalf on one of his many lonely journeys long ago, or was it
Saruman?
The vision now changed. Brief and small but very vivid he caught
a glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room. The table was
littered with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows.
Then there was a pause, and after it many swift scenes followed
that Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which
he had become involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which
he had never seen before but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell.
The sea rose and raged in a great storm. Then he saw against the
Sun, sinking blood-red into a wrack of clouds, the black outline of
a tall ship with torn sails riding up out of the West. Then a wide
river ﬂowing through a populous city. Then a white fortress with
seven towers. And then again a ship with black sails, but now it was
morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing
the emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke as of ﬁre and
battle arose, and again the sun went down in a burning red that faded
into a grey mist; and into the mist a small ship passed away, twinkling
with lights. It vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away.
But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as if a hole
had opened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness.
In the black abyss there appeared a single Eye that slowly grew, until
it ﬁlled nearly all the Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood
rooted, unable to cry out or to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was
rimmed with ﬁre, but was itself glazed, yellow as a cat’s, watchful
and intent, and the black slit of its pupil opened on a pit, a window
into nothing.
Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and
Frodo knew with certainty and horror that among the many things
that it sought he himself was one. But he also knew that it could not
see him – not yet, not unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon
its chain about his neck grew heavy, heavier than a great stone, and
his head was dragged downwards. The Mirror seemed to be growing
hot and curls of steam were rising from the water. He was slipping
forward.
‘Do not touch the water!’ said the Lady Galadriel softly. The vision
faded, and Frodo found that he was looking at the cool stars twinkling
in the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at
the Lady.
‘I know what it was that you last saw,’ she said; ‘for that is also
in my mind. Do not be afraid! But do not think that only by singing
amid the trees, nor even by the slender arrows of elven-bows, is this
land of Lothlórien maintained and defended against its Enemy. I say
to you, Frodo, that even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

365

and know his mind, or all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And
he gropes ever to see me and my thought. But still the door is closed!’
She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards
the East in a gesture of rejection and denial. Eärendil, the Evening
Star, most beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it
that the ﬁgure of the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground.
Its rays glanced upon a ring about her ﬁnger; it glittered like polished
gold overlaid with silver light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if
the Even-star had come down to rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at
the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed to him that he understood.
‘Yes,’ she said, divining his thought, ‘it is not permitted to speak
of it, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be hidden from the
Ring-bearer, and one who has seen the Eye. Verily it is in the land
of Lórien upon the ﬁnger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains.
This is Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeper.
‘He suspects, but he does not know – not yet. Do you not see
now wherefore your coming is to us as the footstep of Doom? For if
you fail, then we are laid bare to the Enemy. Yet if you succeed, then
our power is diminished, and Lothlórien will fade, and the tides of
Time will sweep it away. We must depart into the West, or dwindle
to a rustic folk of dell and cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.’
Frodo bent his head. ‘And what do you wish?’ he said at last.
‘That what should be shall be,’ she answered. ‘The love of the
Elves for their land and their works is deeper than the deeps of the
Sea, and their regret is undying and cannot ever wholly be assuaged.
Yet they will cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they
know him now. For the fate of Lothlórien you are not answerable,
but only for the doing of your own task. Yet I could wish, were it of
any avail, that the One Ring had never been wrought, or had remained
for ever lost.’
‘You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,’ said Frodo.
‘I will give you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter
for me.’
Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh. ‘Wise the Lady
Galadriel may be,’ she said, ‘yet here she has met her match in courtesy.
Gently are you revenged for my testing of your heart at our ﬁrst
meeting. You begin to see with a keen eye. I do not deny that my
heart has greatly desired to ask what you offer. For many long years
I had pondered what I might do, should the Great Ring come into
my hands, and behold! it was brought within my grasp. The evil that
was devised long ago works on in many ways, whether Sauron himself
stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set to the
credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?
‘And now at last it comes. You will give me the Ring freely! In

366

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

place of the Dark Lord you will set up a Queen. And I shall not be
dark, but beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair
as the Sea and the Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Dreadful
as the Storm and the Lightning! Stronger than the foundations of
the earth. All shall love me and despair!’
She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore there issued
a great light that illumined her alone and left all else dark. She stood
before Frodo seeming now tall beyond measurement, and beautiful
beyond enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall,
and the light faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and lo! she was
shrunken: a slender elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle
voice was soft and sad.
‘I pass the test,’ she said. ‘I will diminish, and go into the West,
and remain Galadriel.’
They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke
again. ‘Let us return!’ she said. ‘In the morning you must depart, for
now we have chosen, and the tides of fate are ﬂowing.’
‘I would ask one thing before we go,’ said Frodo, ‘a thing which
I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear
the One Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts
of those that wear them?’
‘You have not tried,’ she said. ‘Only thrice have you set the Ring
upon your ﬁnger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try! It
would destroy you. Did not Gandalf tell you that the rings give power
according to the measure of each possessor? Before you could use
that power you would need to become far stronger, and to train your
will to the domination of others. Yet even so, as Ring-bearer and as
one that has borne it on ﬁnger and seen that which is hidden, your
sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thought more clearly
than many that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that
holds the Seven and the Nine. And did you not see and recognize
the ring upon my ﬁnger? Did you see my ring?’ she asked turning
again to Sam.
‘No, Lady,’ he answered. ‘To tell you the truth, I wondered what
you were talking about. I saw a star through your ﬁngers. But if you’ll
pardon my speaking out, I think my master was right. I wish you’d
take his Ring. You’d put things to rights. You’d stop them digging
up the Gaffer and turning him adrift. You’d make some folk pay for
their dirty work.’
‘I would,’ she said. ‘That is how it would begin. But it would not
stop with that, alas! We will not speak more of it. Let us go!’

Chapter 8
´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO
That night the Company was again summoned to the chamber of
Celeborn, and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words.
At length Celeborn spoke of their departure.
‘Now is the time,’ he said, ‘when those who wish to continue the
Quest must harden their hearts to leave this land. Those who no
longer wish to go forward may remain here, for a while. But whether
they stay or go, none can be sure of peace. For we are come now
to the edge of doom. Here those who wish may await the oncoming
of the hour till either the ways of the world lie open again, or we
summon them to the last need of Lórien. Then they may return to
their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in
battle.’
There was a silence. ‘They all resolved to go forward,’ said Galadriel
looking in their eyes.
‘As for me,’ said Boromir, ‘my way home lies onward and not
back.’
‘That is true,’ said Celeborn, ‘but is all this Company going with
you to Minas Tirith?’
‘We have not decided our course,’ said Aragorn. ‘Beyond Lothlórien I do not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not
think that even he had any clear purpose.’
‘Maybe not,’ said Celeborn, ‘yet when you leave this land, you
can no longer forget the Great River. As some of you know well, it
cannot be crossed by travellers with baggage between Lórien and
Gondor, save by boat. And are not the bridges of Osgiliath broken
down and all the landings held now by the Enemy?
‘On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon
this side, upon the west; but the straight road of the Quest lies east of
the River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take?’
‘If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way
to Minas Tirith,’ answered Boromir. ‘But I am not the leader of the
Company.’ The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful
and troubled.
‘I see that you do not yet know what to do,’ said Celeborn. ‘It is
not my part to choose for you; but I will help you as I may. There
are some among you who can handle boats: Legolas, whose folk know
the swift Forest River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the
traveller.’

368

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘And one Hobbit!’ cried Merry. ‘Not all of us look on boats as
wild horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.’
‘That is well,’ said Celeborn. ‘Then I will furnish your Company
with boats. They must be small and light, for if you go far by water,
there are places where you will be forced to carry them. You will
come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir, and maybe at last to the great falls
of Rauros where the River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and
there are other perils. Boats may make your journey less toilsome for
a while. Yet they will not give you counsel: in the end you must leave
them and the River, and turn west – or east.’
Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats comforted him much, not least because there would now be no need to
decide his course for some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils lay ahead, it seemed better to ﬂoat down the
broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to plod forward with bent
backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still thought boats as
bad as wild horses, or worse, and not all the dangers that he had
survived made him think better of them.
‘All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven before
noon tomorrow,’ said Celeborn. ‘I will send my people to you in the
morning to help you make ready for the journey. Now we will wish
you all a fair night and untroubled sleep.’
‘Good night, my friends!’ said Galadriel. ‘Sleep in peace! Do not
trouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the road tonight.
Maybe the paths that you each shall tread are already laid before
your feet, though you do not see them. Good night!’
The Company now took their leave and returned to their pavilion.
Legolas went with them, for this was to be their last night in Lothlórien, and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take
counsel together.
For a long time they debated what they should do, and how it
would be best to attempt the fulﬁlling of their purpose with the Ring;
but they came to no decision. It was plain that most of them desired
to go ﬁrst to Minas Tirith, and to escape at least for a while from
the terror of the Enemy. They would have been willing to follow a
leader over the River and into the shadow of Mordor; but Frodo
spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in his mind.
His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had been to go
with Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he
believed that the message of the dreams was a summons, and that
the hour had come at last when the heir of Elendil should come forth
and strive with Sauron for the mastery. But in Moria the burden of
Gandalf had been laid on him; and he knew that he could not now

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

369

forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in the end to go with Boromir.
And yet what help could he or any of the Company give to Frodo,
save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?
‘I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,’
said Boromir; and after that he was silent for a while, sitting with his
eyes ﬁxed on Frodo, as if he was trying to read the Halﬂing’s thoughts.
At length he spoke again, softly, as if he was debating with himself.
‘If you wish only to destroy the Ring,’ he said, ‘then there is little
use in war and weapons; and the Men of Minas Tirith cannot help.
But if you wish to destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord, then
it is folly to go without force into his domain; and folly to throw
away.’ He paused suddenly, as if he had become aware that he was
speaking his thoughts aloud. ‘It would be folly to throw lives away,
I mean,’ he ended. ‘It is a choice between defending a strong place
and walking openly into the arms of death. At least, that is how I
see it.’
Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir’s glance,
and he looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir’s thought was different
from his ﬁnal words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The
Ring of Power? He had said something like this at the Council, but
then he had accepted the correction of Elrond. Frodo looked at
Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought and made no sign
that he had heeded Boromir’s words. And so their debate ended.
Merry and Pippin were already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The
night was growing old.
In the morning, as they were beginning to pack their slender goods,
Elves that could speak their tongue came to them and brought them
many gifts of food and clothing for the journey. The food was mostly
in the form of very thin cakes, made of a meal that was baked a light
brown on the outside, and inside was the colour of cream. Gimli
took up one of the cakes and looked at it with a doubtful eye.
‘Cram,’ he said under his breath, as he broke off a crisp corner
and nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and he ate all the
rest of the cake with relish.
‘No more, no more!’ cried the Elves laughing. ‘You have eaten
enough already for a long day’s march.’
‘I thought it was only a kind of cram, such as the Dale-men make
for journeys in the wild,’ said the Dwarf.
‘So it is,’ they answered. ‘But we call it lembas or waybread, and
it is more strengthening than any food made by Men, and it is more
pleasant than cram, by all accounts.’
‘Indeed it is,’ said Gimli. ‘Why, it is better than the honey-cakes
of the Beornings, and that is great praise, for the Beornings are the

370

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

best bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out
their cakes to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts!’
‘All the same, we bid you spare the food,’ they said. ‘Eat little at
a time, and only at need. For these things are given to serve you
when all else fails. The cakes will keep sweet for many many days,
if they are unbroken and left in their leaf-wrappings, as we have
brought them. One will keep a traveller on his feet for a day of long
labour, even if he be one of the tall Men of Minas Tirith.’
The Elves next unwrapped and gave to each of the Company the
clothes they had brought. For each they had provided a hood and
cloak, made according to his size, of the light but warm silken stuff
that the Galadhrim wove. It was hard to say of what colour they
were: grey with the hue of twilight under the trees they seemed to
be; and yet if they were moved, or set in another light, they were green
as shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow ﬁelds by night, dusk-silver as
water under the stars. Each cloak was fastened about the neck with
a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver.
‘Are these magic cloaks?’ asked Pippin, looking at them with
wonder.
‘I do not know what you mean by that,’ answered the leader of
the Elves. ‘They are fair garments, and the web is good, for it was
made in this land. They are Elvish robes certainly, if that is what you
mean. Leaf and branch, water and stone: they have the hue and
beauty of all these things under the twilight of Lórien that we love;
for we put the thought of all that we love into all that we make. Yet
they are garments, not armour, and they will not turn shaft or blade.
But they should serve you well: they are light to wear, and warm
enough or cool enough at need. And you will ﬁnd them a great aid
in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you walk
among the stones or the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of
the Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never
before have we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.’
After their morning meal the Company said farewell to the lawn
by the fountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a fair place, and
it had become like home to them, though they could not count the
days and nights that they had passed there. As they stood for a
moment looking at the white water in the sunlight, Haldir came
walking towards them over the green grass of the glade. Frodo greeted
him with delight.
‘I have returned from the Northern Fences,’ said the Elf, ‘and I
am sent now to be your guide again. The Dimrill Dale is full of
vapour and clouds of smoke, and the mountains are troubled. There
are noises in the deeps of the earth. If any of you had thought of

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

371

returning northwards to your homes, you would not have been able
to pass that way. But come! Your path now goes south.’
As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were
empty; but in the trees above them many voices were murmuring
and singing. They themselves went silently. At last Haldir led them
down the southward slopes of the hill, and they came again to the
great gate hung with lamps, and to the white bridge; and so they
passed out and left the city of the Elves. Then they turned away from
the paved road and took a path that went off into a deep thicket of
mallorn-trees, and passed on, winding through rolling woodlands of
silver shadow, leading them ever down, southwards and eastwards,
towards the shores of the River.
They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand when they
came on a high green wall. Passing through an opening they came
suddenly out of the trees. Before them lay a long lawn of shining
grass, studded with golden elanor that glinted in the sun. The lawn
ran out into a narrow tongue between bright margins: on the right
and west the Silverlode ﬂowed glittering; on the left and east the
Great River rolled its broad waters, deep and dark. On the further
shores the woodlands still marched on southwards as far as eye could
see, but all the banks were bleak and bare. No mallorn lifted its
gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lórien.
On the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meeting of the streams, there was a hythe of white stones and white
wood. By it were moored many boats and barges. Some were brightly
painted, and shone with silver and gold and green, but most were
either white or grey. Three small grey boats had been made ready
for the travellers, and in these the Elves stowed their goods. And
they added also coils of rope, three to each boat. Slender they looked,
but strong, silken to the touch, grey of hue like the elven-cloaks.
‘What are these?’ asked Sam, handling one that lay upon the
greensward.
‘Ropes indeed!’ answered an Elf from the boats. ‘Never travel far
without a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such are
these. They may be a help in many needs.’
‘You don’t need to tell me that!’ said Sam. ‘I came without any,
and I’ve been worried ever since. But I was wondering what these
were made of, knowing a bit about rope-making: it’s in the family as
you might say.’
‘They are made of hithlain,’ said the Elf, ‘but there is no time now
to instruct you in the art of their making. Had we known that this
craft delighted you, we could have taught you much. But now alas!
unless you should at some time return hither, you must be content
with our gift. May it serve you well!’

372

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Come!’ said Haldir. ‘All is now ready for you. Enter the boats!
But take care at ﬁrst!’
‘Heed the words!’ said the other Elves. ‘These boats are light-built,
and they are crafty and unlike the boats of other folk. They will not
sink, lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It
would be wise if you accustomed yourselves to stepping in and out,
here where there is a landing-place, before you set off downstream.’
The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam
were in one boat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin in another; and in the
third were Legolas and Gimli, who had now become fast friends. In
this last boat most of the goods and packs were stowed. The boats
were moved and steered with short-handled paddles that had broad
leaf-shaped blades. When all was ready Aragorn led them on a trial
up the Silverlode. The current was swift and they went forward
slowly. Sam sat in the bows, clutching the sides, and looking back
wistfully to the shore. The sunlight glittering on the water dazzled
his eyes. As they passed beyond the green ﬁeld of the Tongue, the
trees drew down to the river’s brink. Here and there golden leaves
tossed and ﬂoated on the rippling stream. The air was very bright
and still, and there was a silence, except for the high distant song of
larks.
They turned a sharp bend in the river, and there, sailing proudly
down the stream towards them, they saw a swan of great size. The
water rippled on either side of the white breast beneath its curving
neck. Its beak shone like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet
set in yellow stones; its huge white wings were half lifted. A music
came down the river as it drew nearer; and suddenly they perceived
that it was a ship, wrought and carved with elven-skill in the likeness
of a bird. Two elves clad in white steered it with black paddles. In
the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind him stood Galadriel,
tall and white; a circlet of golden ﬂowers was in her hair, and in her
hand she held a harp, and she sang. Sad and sweet was the sound
of her voice in the cool clear air:
I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew:
Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.
Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,
And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.
Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone,
In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion.
There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching
years,
While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears.

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

373

O Lórien! The Winter comes, the bare and leaﬂess Day;
The leaves are falling in the stream, the River ﬂows away.
O Lórien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore
And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor.
But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me,
What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea?
Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The
Lady ended her song and greeted them. ‘We have come to bid our
last farewell,’ she said, ‘and to speed you with blessings from our
land.’
‘Though you have been our guests,’ said Celeborn, ‘you have not
yet eaten with us, and we bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here
between the ﬂowing waters that will bear you far from Lórien.’
The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their
boats and followed it. There in the last end of Egladil upon the
green grass the parting feast was held; but Frodo ate and drank little,
heeding only the beauty of the Lady and her voice. She seemed no
longer perilous or terrible, nor ﬁlled with hidden power. Already she
seemed to him, as by men of later days Elves still at times are seen:
present and yet remote, a living vision of that which has already been
left far behind by the ﬂowing streams of Time.
After they had eaten and drunk, sitting upon the grass, Celeborn
spoke to them again of their journey, and lifting his hand he pointed
south to the woods beyond the Tongue.
‘As you go down the water,’ he said, ‘you will ﬁnd that the trees
will fail, and you will come to a barren country. There the River
ﬂows in stony vales amid high moors, until at last after many leagues
it comes to the tall island of the Tindrock, that we call Tol Brandir.
There it casts its arms about the steep shores of the isle, and falls
then with a great noise and smoke over the cataracts of Rauros down
into the Nindalf, the Wetwang as it is called in your tongue. That is
a wide region of sluggish fen where the stream becomes tortuous and
much divided. There the Entwash ﬂows in by many mouths from
the Forest of Fangorn in the west. About that stream, on this side
of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the further side are the bleak hills
of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the East there, for they
look out over the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith
Gorgor and the black gates of Mordor.
‘Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas Tirith, will do
well to leave the Great River above Rauros and cross the Entwash
before it ﬁnds the marshes. Yet they should not go too far up that
stream, nor risk becoming entangled in the Forest of Fangorn. That

374

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

is a strange land, and is now little known. But Boromir and Aragorn
doubtless do not need this warning.’
‘Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,’ said Boromir.
‘But what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives’
tales, such as we tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is
now to us so far away that fancy can wander freely there. Of old
Fangorn lay upon the borders of our realm; but it is now many lives
of men since any of us visited it, to prove or disprove the legends
that have come down from distant years.
‘I have myself been at whiles in Rohan, but I have never crossed
it northwards. When I was sent out as a messenger, I passed through
the Gap by the skirts of the White Mountains, and crossed the Isen
and the Greyﬂood into Northerland. A long and wearisome journey.
Four hundred leagues I reckoned it, and it took me many months;
for I lost my horse at Tharbad, at the fording of the Greyﬂood. After
that journey, and the road I have trodden with this Company, I do
not much doubt that I shall ﬁnd a way through Rohan, and Fangorn
too, if need be.’
‘Then I need say no more,’ said Celeborn. ‘But do not despise
the lore that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance
that old wives keep in memory word of things that once were needful
for the wise to know.’
Now Galadriel rose from the grass, and taking a cup from one of
her maidens she ﬁlled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn.
‘Now it is time to drink the cup of farewell,’ she said. ‘Drink, Lord
of the Galadhrim! And let not your heart be sad, though night must
follow noon, and already our evening draweth nigh.’
Then she brought the cup to each of the Company, and bade
them drink and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded
them to sit again on the grass, and chairs were set for her and for
Celeborn. Her maidens stood silent about her, and a while she looked
upon her guests. At last she spoke again.
‘We have drunk the cup of parting,’ she said, ‘and the shadows
fall between us. But before you go, I have brought in my ship gifts
which the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer you in memory
of Lothlórien.’ Then she called to each in turn.
‘Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of your
Company,’ she said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had
been made to ﬁt his sword. It was overlaid with a tracery of ﬂowers
and leaves wrought of silver and gold, and on it were set in elven-runes
formed of many gems the name Andúril and the lineage of the sword.
‘The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be stained or
broken even in defeat,’ she said. ‘But is there aught else that you

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

375

desire of me at our parting? For darkness will ﬂow between us, and
it may be that we shall not meet again, unless it be far hence upon
a road that has no returning.’
And Aragorn answered: ‘Lady, you know all my desire, and long
held in keeping the only treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to
give me, even if you would; and only through darkness shall I come
to it.’
‘Yet maybe this will lighten your heart,’ said Galadriel; ‘for it was
left in my care to be given to you, should you pass through this land.’
Then she lifted from her lap a great stone of a clear green, set in a
silver brooch that was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with outspread wings; and as she held it up the gem ﬂashed like the sun
shining through the leaves of spring. ‘This stone I gave to Celebrı́an
my daughter, and she to hers; and now it comes to you as a token
of hope. In this hour take the name that was foretold for you, Elessar,
the Elfstone of the House of Elendil!’
Then Aragorn took the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast,
and those who saw him wondered; for they had not marked before how
tall and kingly he stood, and it seemed to them that many years of toil
had fallen from his shoulders. ‘For the gifts that you have given me I
thank you,’ he said, ‘O Lady of Lórien of whom were sprung Celebrı́an
and Arwen Evenstar. What praise could I say more?’
The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boromir, and
to him she gave a belt of gold; and to Merry and Pippin she gave
small silver belts, each with a clasp wrought like a golden ﬂower. To
Legolas she gave a bow such as the Galadhrim used, longer and
stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, and strung with a string of
elf-hair. With it went a quiver of arrows.
‘For you little gardener and lover of trees,’ she said to Sam, ‘I
have only a small gift.’ She put into his hand a little box of plain grey
wood, unadorned save for a single silver rune upon the lid. ‘Here is
set G for Galadriel,’ she said; ‘but also it may stand for garden in
your tongue. In this box there is earth from my orchard, and such
blessing as Galadriel has still to bestow is upon it. It will not keep
you on your road, nor defend you against any peril; but if you keep
it and see your home again at last, then perhaps it may reward you.
Though you should ﬁnd all barren and laid waste, there will be few
gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, if you
sprinkle this earth there. Then you may remember Galadriel, and
catch a glimpse far off of Lórien, that you have seen only in our
winter. For our Spring and our Summer are gone by, and they will
never be seen on earth again save in memory.’
Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaudible, as
he clutched the box and bowed as well as he could.

376

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves?’ said Galadriel,
turning to Gimli.
‘None, Lady,’ answered Gimli. ‘It is enough for me to have seen
the Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.’
‘Hear all ye Elves!’ she cried to those about her. ‘Let none say
again that Dwarves are grasping and ungracious! Yet surely, Gimli
son of Glóin, you desire something that I could give? Name it, I bid
you! You shall not be the only guest without a gift.’
‘There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,’ said Gimli, bowing low and
stammering. ‘Nothing, unless it might be – unless it is permitted to
ask, nay, to name a single strand of your hair, which surpasses the
gold of the earth as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not
ask for such a gift. But you commanded me to name my desire.’
The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and Celeborn
gazed at the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. ‘It is said that
the skill of the Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues,’
she said; ‘yet that is not true of Gimli. For none have ever made to
me a request so bold and yet so courteous. And how shall I refuse,
since I commanded him to speak? But tell me, what would you do
with such a gift?’
‘Treasure it, Lady,’ he answered, ‘in memory of your words to me
at our ﬁrst meeting. And if ever I return to the smithies of my home,
it shall be set in imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of my house,
and a pledge of good will between the Mountain and the Wood until
the end of days.’
Then the Lady unbraided one of her long tresses, and cut off three
golden hairs, and laid them in Gimli’s hand. ‘These words shall go
with the gift,’ she said. ‘I do not foretell, for all foretelling is now
vain: on the one hand lies darkness, and on the other only hope. But
if hope should not fail, then I say to you, Gimli son of Glóin, that
your hands shall ﬂow with gold, and yet over you gold shall have no
dominion.
‘And you, Ring-bearer,’ she said, turning to Frodo. ‘I come to you
last who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared this.’
She held up a small crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and
rays of white light sprang from her hand. ‘In this phial,’ she said, ‘is
caught the light of Eärendil’s star, set amid the waters of my fountain.
It will shine still brighter when night is about you. May it be a light
to you in dark places, when all other lights go out. Remember
Galadriel and her Mirror!’
Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between them,
he saw her again standing like a queen, great and beautiful, but no
longer terrible. He bowed, but found no words to say.
*
*
*

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

377

Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to the hythe.
A yellow noon lay on the green land of the Tongue, and the water
glittered with silver. All at last was made ready. The Company took
their places in the boats as before. Crying farewell, the Elves of Lórien
with long grey poles thrust them out into the ﬂowing stream, and
the rippling waters bore them slowly away. The travellers sat still
without moving or speaking. On the green bank near to the very
point of the Tongue the Lady Galadriel stood alone and silent. As
they passed her they turned and their eyes watched her slowly ﬂoating
away from them. For so it seemed to them: Lórien was slipping
backward, like a bright ship masted with enchanted trees, sailing on
to forgotten shores, while they sat helpless upon the margin of the
grey and leaﬂess world.
Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the currents of
the Great River, and their boats turned and began to speed southward. Soon the white form of the Lady was small and distant. She
shone like a window of glass upon a far hill in the westering sun, or
as a remote lake seen from a mountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of
the land. Then it seemed to Frodo that she lifted her arms in a ﬁnal
farewell, and far but piercing-clear on the following wind came the
sound of her voice singing. But now she sang in the ancient tongue
of the Elves beyond the Sea, and he did not understand the words:
fair was the music, but it did not comfort him.
Yet as is the way of Elvish words, they remained graven in his
memory, and long afterwards he interpreted them, as well as he could:
the language was that of Elven-song and spoke of things little known
on Middle-earth.
Ai! laurië lantar lassi súrinen,
yéni únótimë ve rámar aldaron!
Yéni ve lintë yuldar avánier
mi oromardi lisse-miruvóreva
Andúnë pella, Vardo tellumar
nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni
ómaryo airetári-lı́rinen.
Sı́ man i yulma nin enquantuva?
An sı́ Tintallë Varda Oiolossëo
ve fanyar máryat Elentári ortanë,
ar ilyë tier undulávë lumbulë;
ar sindanóriello caita mornië
i falmalinnar imbë met, ar hı́sië
untúpa Calaciryo mı́ri oialë.
Sı́ vanwa ná, Rómello vanwa, Valimar!

378

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Namárië! Nai hiruvalyë Valimar.
Nai elyë hiruva. Namárië!
‘Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind, long years numberless as
the wings of trees! The years have passed like swift draughts of the
sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults
of Varda wherein the stars tremble in the song of her voice, holy and
queenly. Who now shall reﬁll the cup for me? For now the Kindler,
Varda, the Queen of the Stars, from Mount Everwhite has uplifted
her hands like clouds, and all paths are drowned deep in shadow;
and out of a grey country darkness lies on the foaming waves between
us, and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever. Now lost, lost
to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou shalt ﬁnd
Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt ﬁnd it. Farewell!’ Varda is the name
of that Lady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth.
Suddenly the River swept round a bend, and the banks rose upon
either side, and the light of Lórien was hidden. To that fair land
Frodo never came again.
The travellers now turned their faces to the journey; the sun was
before them, and their eyes were dazzled, for all were ﬁlled with tears.
Gimli wept openly.
‘I have looked the last upon that which was fairest,’ he said to
Legolas his companion. ‘Henceforward I will call nothing fair, unless
it be her gift.’ He put his hand to his breast.
‘Tell me, Legolas, why did I come on this Quest? Little did I know
where the chief peril lay! Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we could
not foresee what we might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark
was the danger that I feared, and it did not hold me back. But I
would not have come, had I known the danger of light and joy. Now
I have taken my worst wound in this parting, even if I were to go
this night straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for Gimli son of Glóin!’
‘Nay!’ said Legolas. ‘Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world
in these after-days. For such is the way of it: to ﬁnd and lose, as it
seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you
blessed, Gimli son of Glóin: for your loss you suffer of your own free
will, and you might have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken
your companions, and the least reward that you shall have is that the
memory of Lothlórien shall remain ever clear and unstained in your
heart, and shall neither fade nor grow stale.’
‘Maybe,’ said Gimli; ‘and I thank you for your words. True words
doubtless; yet all such comfort is cold. Memory is not what the heart
desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zâram. Or so says
the heart of Gimli the Dwarf. Elves may see things otherwise. Indeed

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

379

I have heard that for them memory is more like to the waking world
than to a dream. Not so for Dwarves.
‘But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in
the water with all this baggage, and the Great River is swift. I do not
wish to drown my grief in cold water.’ He took up a paddle, and
steered towards the western bank, following Aragorn’s boat ahead,
which had already moved out of the middle stream.
So the Company went on their long way, down the wide hurrying
waters, borne ever southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank,
and they could not see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze
died away and the River ﬂowed without a sound. No voice of bird
broke the silence. The sun grew misty as the day grew old, until it
gleamed in a pale sky like a high white pearl. Then it faded into the
West, and dusk came early, followed by a grey and starless night.
Far into the dark quiet hours they ﬂoated on, guiding their boats
under the overhanging shadows of the western woods. Great trees
passed by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty roots through
the mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and
listened to the faint lap and gurgle of the River fretting among the
tree-roots and driftwood near the shore, until his head nodded and
he fell into an uneasy sleep.

Chapter 9
THE GREAT RIVER
Frodo was roused by Sam. He found that he was lying, well wrapped,
under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on
the west bank of the Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night
away, and the grey of morning was dim among the bare branches.
Gimli was busy with a small ﬁre near at hand.
They started again before the day was broad. Not that most of
the Company were eager to hurry southwards: they were content that
the decision, which they must make at latest when they came to
Rauros and the Tindrock Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let
the River bear them on at its own pace, having no desire to hasten
towards the perils that lay beyond, whichever course they took in the
end. Aragorn let them drift with the stream as they wished, husbanding their strength against weariness to come. But he insisted
that at least they should start early each day and journey on far into
the evening; for he felt in his heart that time was pressing, and he
feared that the Dark Lord had not been idle while they lingered in
Lórien.
Nonetheless they saw no sign of any enemy that day, nor the next.
The dull grey hours passed without event. As the third day of their
voyage wore on the lands changed slowly: the trees thinned and then
failed altogether. On the eastern bank to their left they saw long
formless slopes stretching up and away towards the sky; brown and
withered they looked, as if ﬁre had passed over them, leaving no
living blade of green: an unfriendly waste without even a broken tree
or a bold stone to relieve the emptiness. They had come to the Brown
Lands that lay, vast and desolate, between Southern Mirkwood and
the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed of
the Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell.
Upon the west to their right the land was treeless also, but it was
ﬂat, and in many places green with wide plains of grass. On this side
of the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut
out all view to the west, as the little boats went rustling by along
their ﬂuttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed
in the light cold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through
openings Frodo could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads, and
far beyond them hills in the sunset, and away on the edge of sight
a dark line, where marched the southernmost ranks of the Misty
Mountains.

THE GREAT RIVER

381

There was no sign of living moving things, save birds. Of these
there were many: small fowl whistling and piping in the reeds, but
they were seldom seen. Once or twice the travellers heard the rush
and whine of swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx
streaming along the sky.
‘Swans!’ said Sam. ‘And mighty big ones too!’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘and they are black swans.’
‘How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks!’ said
Frodo. ‘I always imagined that as one journeyed south it got warmer
and merrier, until winter was left behind for ever.’
‘But we have not journeyed far south yet,’ answered Aragorn. ‘It
is still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world is cold
until the sudden spring, and we may yet have snow again. Far away
down in the Bay of Belfalas, to which Anduin runs, it is warm and
merry, maybe, or would be but for the Enemy. But here we are not
above sixty leagues, I guess, south of the Southfarthing away in your
Shire, hundreds of long miles yonder. You are looking now southwest across the north plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the land of
the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlight
that runs down from Fangorn to join the Great River. That is the
north boundary of Rohan; and of old all that lay between Limlight
and the White Mountains belonged to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and
pleasant land, and its grass has no rival; but in these evil days folk
do not dwell by the River or ride often to its shores. Anduin is wide,
yet the orcs can shoot their arrows far across the stream; and of late,
it is said, they have dared to cross the water and raid the herds and
studs of Rohan.’
Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily. The trees had seemed
hostile before, as if they harboured secret eyes and lurking dangers;
now he wished that the trees were still there. He felt that the Company
was too naked, aﬂoat in little open boats in the midst of shelterless
lands, and on a river that was the frontier of war.
In the next day or two, as they went on, borne steadily southwards,
this feeling of insecurity grew on all the Company. For a whole day
they took to their paddles and hastened forward. The banks slid by.
Soon the River broadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches
lay upon the east, and there were gravel-shoals in the water, so that
careful steering was needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds,
over which ﬂowed a chill air from the East. On the other side the
meads had become rolling downs of withered grass amidst a land of
fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of the lawns and fountains,
the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlórien. There was little speech
and no laughter in any of the boats. Each member of the Company
was busy with his own thoughts.

382

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a summer
night in some northern glade amid the beech-woods; Gimli was
ﬁngering gold in his mind, and wondering if it were ﬁt to be wrought
into the housing of the Lady’s gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle
boat were ill at ease, for Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes
biting his nails, as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn’s.
Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking back, caught a queer gleam
in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo. Sam had long ago
made up his mind that, though boats were maybe not as dangerous
as he had been brought up to believe, they were far more uncomfortable than even he had imagined. He was cramped and miserable,
having nothing to do but stare at the winter-lands crawling by and
the grey water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in
use they did not trust Sam with one.
As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over
the bowed heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he
was drowsy and longed for camp and the feel of earth under his toes.
Suddenly something caught his sight: at ﬁrst he stared at it listlessly,
then he sat up and rubbed his eyes; but when he looked again he
could not see it any more.
That night they camped on a small eyot close to the western bank.
Sam lay rolled in blankets beside Frodo. ‘I had a funny dream an
hour or two before we stopped, Mr. Frodo,’ he said. ‘Or maybe it
wasn’t a dream. Funny it was anyway.’
‘Well, what was it?’ said Frodo, knowing that Sam would not settle
down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. ‘I haven’t seen or
thought of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlórien.’
‘It wasn’t funny that way, Mr. Frodo. It was queer. All wrong, if
it wasn’t a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a
log with eyes!’
‘The log’s all right,’ said Frodo. ‘There are many in the River.
But leave out the eyes!’
‘That I won’t,’ said Sam. ‘’Twas the eyes as made me sit up, so
to speak. I saw what I took to be a log ﬂoating along in the half-light
behind Gimli’s boat; but I didn’t give much heed to it. Then it
seemed as if the log was slowly catching us up. And that was peculiar,
as you might say, seeing as we were all ﬂoating on the stream together.
Just then I saw the eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a
hump at the near end of the log. What’s more, it wasn’t a log, for it
had paddle-feet, like a swan’s almost, only they seemed bigger, and
kept dipping in and out of the water.
‘That’s when I sat right up and rubbed my eyes, meaning to give

THE GREAT RIVER

383

a shout, if it was still there when I had rubbed the drowse out of my
head. For the whatever-it-was was coming along fast now and getting
close behind Gimli. But whether those two lamps spotted me moving
and staring, or whether I came to my senses, I don’t know. When I
looked again, it wasn’t there. Yet I think I caught a glimpse, with
the tail of my eye, as the saying is, of something dark shooting under
the shadow of the bank. I couldn’t see no more eyes, though.
‘I said to myself: ‘‘dreaming again, Sam Gamgee,’’ I said; and I
said no more just then. But I’ve been thinking since, and now I’m
not so sure. What do you make of it, Mr. Frodo?’
‘I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and sleep in
your eyes, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘if this was the ﬁrst time that those eyes
had been seen. But it isn’t. I saw them away back north before we
reached Lórien. And I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to
the ﬂet that night. Haldir saw it too. And do you remember the report
of the Elves that went after the orc-band?’
‘Ah,’ said Sam, ‘I do; and I remember more too. I don’t like my
thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo’s
stories and all, I fancy I could put a name on the creature, at a guess.
A nasty name. Gollum, maybe?’
‘Yes, that is what I have feared for some time,’ said Frodo. ‘Ever
since the night on the ﬂet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and
picked up our trail then; but I hoped that our stay in Lórien would
throw him off the scent again. The miserable creature must have
been hiding in the woods by the Silverlode, watching us start off !’
‘That’s about it,’ said Sam. ‘And we’d better be a bit more watchful
ourselves, or we’ll feel some nasty ﬁngers round our necks one of
these nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. And that’s what I
was leading up to. No need to trouble Strider or the others tonight.
I’ll keep watch. I can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage
in a boat, as you might say.’
‘I might,’ said Frodo, ‘and I might say ‘‘luggage with eyes’’. You
shall watch; but only if you promise to wake me half-way towards
morning, if nothing happens before then.’
In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to ﬁnd
Sam shaking him. ‘It’s a shame to wake you,’ whispered Sam, ‘but
that’s what you said. There’s nothing to tell, or not much. I thought
I heard some soft plashing and a snifﬁng noise, a while back; but
you hear a lot of such queer sounds by a river at night.’
He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets, and
fought off his sleep. Minutes or hours passed slowly, and nothing
happened. Frodo was just yielding to the temptation to lie down
again when a dark shape, hardly visible, ﬂoated close to one of the

384

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

moored boats. A long whitish hand could be dimly seen as it shot
out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes shone coldly
as they peered inside, and then they lifted and gazed up at Frodo on
the eyot. They were not more than a yard or two away, and Frodo
heard the soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting
from its sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut
off. There was another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot
away downstream into the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned
over, and sat up.
‘What is it?’ he whispered, springing up and coming to Frodo. ‘I
felt something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword?’
‘Gollum,’ answered Frodo. ‘Or at least, so I guess.’
‘Ah!’ said Aragorn. ‘So you know about our little footpad, do you?
He padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel.
Since we took to boats, he has been lying on a log and paddling with
hands and feet. I have tried to catch him once or twice at night; but
he is slier than a fox, and as slippery as a ﬁsh. I hoped the river-voyage
would beat him, but he is too clever a waterman.
‘We shall have to try going faster tomorrow. You lie down now,
and I will keep watch for what is left of the night. I wish I could lay
my hands on the wretch. We might make him useful. But if I cannot,
we shall have to try and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart
from murder by night on his own account, he may put any enemy
that is about on our track.’
The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a shadow
again. After that the Company kept a sharp look-out, but they saw
no more of Gollum while the voyage lasted. If he was still following,
he was very wary and cunning. At Aragorn’s bidding they paddled
now for long spells, and the banks went swiftly by. But they saw little
of the country, for they journeyed mostly by night and twilight, resting
by day, and lying as hidden as the land allowed. In this way the time
passed without event until the seventh day.
The weather was still grey and overcast, with wind from the East,
but as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and
pools of faint light, yellow and pale green, opened under the grey
shores of cloud. There the white rind of the new Moon could be
seen glimmering in the remote lakes. Sam looked at it and puckered
his brows.
The next day the country on either side began to change rapidly.
The banks began to rise and grow stony. Soon they were passing
through a hilly rocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes
buried in deep brakes of thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and
creepers. Behind them stood low crumbling cliffs, and chimneys of

THE GREAT RIVER

385

grey weathered stone dark with ivy; and beyond these again there
rose high ridges crowned with wind-writhen ﬁrs. They were drawing
near to the grey hill-country of the Emyn Muil, the southern march
of Wilderland.
There were many birds about the cliffs and the rock-chimneys,
and all day high in the air ﬂocks of birds had been circling, black
against the pale sky. As they lay in their camp that day Aragorn
watched the ﬂights doubtfully, wondering if Gollum had been doing
some mischief and the news of their voyage was now moving in the
wilderness. Later as the sun was setting, and the Company was stirring and getting ready to start again, he descried a dark spot against
the fading light: a great bird high and far off, now wheeling, now
ﬂying on slowly southwards.
‘What is that, Legolas?’ he asked, pointing to the northern sky. ‘Is
it, as I think, an eagle?’
‘Yes,’ said Legolas. ‘It is an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder what
that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.’
‘We will not start until it is fully dark,’ said Aragorn.
The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless;
the grey east wind had passed away. The thin crescent of the Moon
had fallen early into the pale sunset, but the sky was clear above, and
though far away in the South there were great ranges of cloud that
still shone faintly, in the West stars glinted bright.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘We will venture one more journey by night.
We are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well; for
I have never journeyed by water in these parts before, not between
here and the rapids of Sarn Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning,
those are still many miles ahead. Still there are dangerous places even
before we come there: rocks and stony eyots in the stream. We must
keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle swiftly.’
To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watchman. He
lay forward peering into the gloom. The night grew dark, but the
stars above were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer on the
face of the River. It was close on midnight, and they had been drifting
for some while, hardly using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried
out. Only a few yards ahead dark shapes loomed up in the stream
and he heard the swirl of racing water. There was a swift current
which swung left, towards the eastern shore where the channel was
clear. As they were swept aside the travellers could see, now very
close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were
thrust out far into the stream like a ridge of teeth. The boats were
all huddled together.
‘Hoy there, Aragorn!’ shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped into

386

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the leader. ‘This is madness! We cannot dare the Rapids by night!
But no boat can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.’
‘Back, back!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Turn! Turn if you can!’ He drove
his paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round.
‘I am out of my reckoning,’ he said to Frodo. ‘I did not know that
we had come so far: Anduin ﬂows faster than I thought. Sarn Gebir
must be close at hand already.’
With great efforts they checked the boats and slowly brought them
about; but at ﬁrst they could make only small headway against the
current, and all the time they were carried nearer and nearer to the
eastern bank. Now dark and ominous it loomed up in the night.
‘All together, paddle!’ shouted Boromir. ‘Paddle! Or we shall be
driven on the shoals.’ Even as he spoke Frodo felt the keel beneath
him grate upon stone.
At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows
whistled over them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo
between the shoulders and he lurched forward with a cry, letting go
his paddle: but the arrow fell back, foiled by his hidden coat of mail.
Another passed through Aragorn’s hood; and a third stood fast in
the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry’s hand. Sam thought
he could glimpse black ﬁgures running to and fro upon the long
shingle-banks that lay under the eastern shore. They seemed very
near.
‘Yrch! ’ said Legolas, falling into his own tongue.
‘Orcs!’ cried Gimli.
‘Gollum’s doing, I’ll be bound,’ said Sam to Frodo. ‘And a nice
place to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into
their arms!’
They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam took a
hand. Every moment they expected to feel the bite of black-feathered
arrows. Many whined overhead or struck the water nearby; but there
were no more hits. It was dark, but not too dark for the night-eyes
of Orcs, and in the star-glimmer they must have offered their cunning
foes some mark, unless it was that the grey cloaks of Lórien and the
grey timber of the elf-wrought boats defeated the malice of the archers
of Mordor.
Stroke by stroke they laboured on. In the darkness it was hard to
be sure that they were indeed moving at all; but slowly the swirl of
the water grew less, and the shadow of the eastern bank faded back
into the night. At last, as far as they could judge, they had reached
the middle of the stream again and had driven their boats back some
distance above the jutting rocks. Then half turning they thrust
them with all their strength towards the western shore. Under the

THE GREAT RIVER

387

shadow of bushes leaning out over the water they halted and drew
breath.
Legolas laid down his paddle and took up the bow that he had
brought from Lórien. Then he sprang ashore and climbed a few paces
up the bank. Stringing the bow and ﬁtting an arrow he turned, peering
back over the River into the darkness. Across the water there were
shrill cries, but nothing could be seen.
Frodo looked up at the Elf standing tall above him, as he gazed
into the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned
with sharp white stars that glittered in the black pools of the sky
behind. But now rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds
advanced, sending out dark outriders into the starry ﬁelds. A sudden
dread fell on the Company.
‘Elbereth Gilthoniel! ’ sighed Legolas as he looked up. Even as he
did so, a dark shape, like a cloud and yet not a cloud, for it moved
far more swiftly, came out of the blackness in the South, and sped
towards the Company, blotting out all light as it approached. Soon
it appeared as a great winged creature, blacker than the pits in the
night. Fierce voices rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo
felt a sudden chill running through him and clutching at his heart;
there was a deadly cold, like the memory of an old wound, in his
shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide.
Suddenly the great bow of Lórien sang. Shrill went the arrow from
the elven-string. Frodo looked up. Almost above him the winged
shape swerved. There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of
the air, vanishing down into the gloom of the eastern shore. The sky
was clean again. There was a tumult of many voices far away, cursing
and wailing in the darkness, and then silence. Neither shaft nor cry
came again from the east that night.
After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt their
way along the water’s edge for some distance, until they found a
small shallow bay. A few low trees grew there close to the water, and
behind them rose a steep rocky bank. Here the Company decided to
stay and await the dawn: it was useless to attempt to move further
by night. They made no camp and lit no ﬁre, but lay huddled in the
boats, moored close together.
‘Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas!’
said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of lembas. ‘That was a mighty
shot in the dark, my friend!’
‘But who can say what it hit?’ said Legolas.
‘I cannot,’ said Gimli. ‘But I am glad that the shadow came no
nearer. I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow
in Moria – the shadow of the Balrog,’ he ended in a whisper.

388

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘It was not a Balrog,’ said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that
had come upon him. ‘It was something colder. I think it was——’
Then he paused and fell silent.
‘What do you think?’ asked Boromir eagerly, leaning from his boat,
as if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo’s face.
‘I think—No, I will not say,’ answered Frodo. ‘Whatever it was,
its fall has dismayed our enemies.’
‘So it seems,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet where they are, and how many,
and what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all
be sleepless! Dark hides us now. But what the day will show who
can tell? Have your weapons close to hand!’
Sam sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he were counting on
his ﬁngers, and looking up at the sky. ‘It’s very strange,’ he murmured. ‘The Moon’s the same in the Shire and in Wilderland, or it
ought to be. But either it’s out of its running, or I’m all wrong in my
reckoning. You’ll remember, Mr. Frodo, the Moon was waning as
we lay on the ﬂet up in that tree: a week from the full, I reckon. And
we’d been a week on the way last night, when up pops a New Moon
as thin as a nail-paring, as if we had never stayed no time in the
Elvish country.
‘Well, I can remember three nights there for certain, and I seem
to remember several more, but I would take my oath it was never a
whole month. Anyone would think that time did not count in there!’
‘And perhaps that was the way of it,’ said Frodo. ‘In that land,
maybe, we were in a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was
not, I think, until Silverlode bore us back to Anduin that we returned
to the time that ﬂows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I
don’t remember any moon, either new or old, in Caras Galadhon:
only stars by night and sun by day.’
Legolas stirred in his boat. ‘Nay, time does not tarry ever,’ he said;
‘but change and growth is not in all things and places alike. For the
Elves the world moves, and it moves both very swift and very slow.
Swift, because they themselves change little, and all else ﬂeets by: it
is a grief to them. Slow, because they need not count the running
years, not for themselves. The passing seasons are but ripples ever
repeated in the long long stream. Yet beneath the Sun all things must
wear to an end at last.’
‘But the wearing is slow in Lórien,’ said Frodo. ‘The power of the
Lady is on it. Rich are the hours, though short they seem, in Caras
Galadhon, where Galadriel wields the Elven-ring.’
‘That should not have been said outside Lórien, not even to me,’
said Aragorn. ‘Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land
you lost your count. There time ﬂowed swiftly by us, as for the Elves.

THE GREAT RIVER

389

The old moon passed, and a new moon waxed and waned in the
world outside, while we tarried there. And yestereve a new moon
came again. Winter is nearly gone. Time ﬂows on to a spring of little
hope.’
The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again across
the water. The travellers huddled in their boats felt the changing
of the weather. The air grew warm and very still under the great
moist clouds that had ﬂoated up from the South and the distant seas.
The rushing of the River over the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow
louder and closer. The twigs of the trees above them began to drip.
When the day came the mood of the world about them had become
soft and sad. Slowly the dawn grew to a pale light, diffused and
shadowless. There was mist on the River, and white fog swathed the
shore; the far bank could not be seen.
‘I can’t abide fog,’ said Sam; ‘but this seems to be a lucky one.
Now perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing
us.’
‘Perhaps so,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it will be hard to ﬁnd the path
unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must ﬁnd the path, if we
are to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.’
‘I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River
any further,’ said Boromir. ‘If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we
can abandon these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward,
until we come to the Entwash and cross into my own land.’
‘We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,’ said Aragorn, ‘but
that is not yet agreed. And such a course may be more perilous than
it sounds. The vale of Entwash is ﬂat and fenny, and fog is a deadly
peril there for those on foot and laden. I would not abandon our
boats until we must. The River is at least a path that cannot be
missed.’
‘But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,’ objected Boromir. ‘And
even if you pass the Gates of Argonath and come unmolested to the
Tindrock, what will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in
the marshes?’
‘No!’ answered Aragorn. ‘Say rather that we will bear our boats
by the ancient way to Rauros-foot, and there take to the water again.
Do you not know, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North
Stair, and the high seat upon Amon Hen, that were made in the days
of the great kings? I at least have a mind to stand in that high place
again, before I decide my further course. There, maybe, we shall see
some sign that will guide us.’
Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it became
plain that Frodo would follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave

390

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in. ‘It is not the way of the Men of Minas Tirith to desert their friends
at need,’ he said, ‘and you will need my strength, if ever you are to
reach the Tindrock. To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There
I shall turn to my home, alone if my help has not earned the reward
of any companionship.’
The day was now growing, and the fog had lifted a little. It was
decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along
the shore, while the others remained by the boats. Aragorn hoped to
ﬁnd some way by which they could carry both their boats and their
baggage to the smoother water beyond the Rapids.
‘Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,’ he said, ‘but that does
not say that we should come through Sarn Gebir alive. None have
ever done so yet. No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this
region, for even in their great days their realm did not reach up
Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil; but there is a portage-way somewhere on the western shore, if I can ﬁnd it. It cannot yet have
perished; for light boats used to journey out of Wilderland down to
Osgiliath, and still did so until a few years ago, when the Orcs of
Mordor began to multiply.’
‘Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North, and the
Orcs prowl on the east-shore,’ said Boromir. ‘If you go forward, peril
will grow with every mile, even if you ﬁnd a path.’
‘Peril lies ahead on every southward road,’ answered Aragorn.
‘Wait for us one day. If we do not return in that time, you will know
that evil has indeed befallen us. Then you must take a new leader
and follow him as best you can.’
It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas
climb the steep bank and vanish into the mists; but his fears proved
groundless. Only two or three hours had passed, and it was barely
mid-day, when the shadowy shapes of the explorers appeared again.
‘All is well,’ said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank. ‘There
is a track, and it leads to a good landing that is still serviceable. The
distance is not great: the head of the Rapids is but half a mile below
us, and they are little more than a mile long. Not far beyond them
the stream becomes clear and smooth again, though it runs swiftly.
Our hardest task will be to get our boats and baggage to the old
portage-way. We have found it, but it lies well back from the waterside here, and runs under the lee of a rock-wall, a furlong or more
from the shore. We did not ﬁnd where the northward landing lies.
If it still remains, we must have passed it yesterday night. We might
labour far upstream and yet miss it in the fog. I fear we must leave
the River now, and make for the portage-way as best we can from
here.’

THE GREAT RIVER

391

‘That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,’ said Boromir.
‘Yet such as we are we will try it,’ said Aragorn.
‘Aye, we will,’ said Gimli. ‘The legs of Men will lag on a rough
road, while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight,
Master Boromir!’
The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The
goods were taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank,
where there was a level space. Then the boats were drawn out of the
water and carried up. They were far less heavy than any had expected.
Of what tree growing in the Elvish country they were made not even
Legolas knew; but the wood was tough and yet strangely light. Merry
and Pippin alone could carry their boat with ease along the ﬂat.
Nonetheless it needed the strength of the two Men to lift and haul
them over the ground that the Company now had to cross. It sloped
up away from the River, a tumbled waste of grey limestone-boulders,
with many hidden holes shrouded with weeds and bushes; there were
thickets of brambles, and sheer dells; and here and there boggy pools
fed by waters trickling from the terraces further inland.
One by one Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats, while the
others toiled and scrambled after them with the baggage. At last all
was removed and laid on the portage-way. Then with little further
hindrance, save from sprawling briars and many fallen stones, they
moved forward all together. Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling
rock-wall, and to their left mist shrouded the River: they could hear
it rushing and foaming over the sharp shelves and stony teeth of Sarn
Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they made the journey, before
all was brought safe to the southern landing.
There the portage-way, turning back to the water-side, ran gently
down to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been
scooped in the river-side, not by hand, but by the water swirling
down from Sarn Gebir against a low pier of rock that jutted out some
way into the stream. Beyond it the shore rose sheer into a grey cliff,
and there was no further passage for those on foot.
Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was
closing in. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush
and roar of the Rapids hidden in the mist; they were tired and sleepy,
and their hearts were as gloomy as the dying day.
‘Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,’ said
Boromir. ‘We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass
the Gates of Argonath by night, we are all too tired – except, no
doubt, our sturdy dwarf.’
Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat.
‘Let us rest as much as we can now,’ said Aragorn. ‘Tomorrow

392

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

we must journey by day again. Unless the weather changes once more
and cheats us, we shall have a good chance of slipping through,
unseen by any eyes on the eastern shore. But tonight two must watch
together in turns: three hours off and one on guard.’
Nothing happened that night worse than a brief drizzle of rain an
hour before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already
the fog was thinning. They kept as close as they could to the western
side, and they could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever
higher, shadowy walls with their feet in the hurrying river. In the
mid-morning the clouds drew down lower, and it began to rain
heavily. They drew the skin-covers over their boats to prevent them
from being ﬂooded, and drifted on; little could be seen before them
or about them through the grey falling curtains.
The rain, however, did not last long. Slowly the sky above grew
lighter, and then suddenly the clouds broke, and their draggled fringes
trailed away northward up the River. The fogs and mists were gone.
Before the travellers lay a wide ravine, with great rocky sides to which
clung, upon shelves and in narrow crevices, a few thrawn trees. The
channel grew narrower and the River swifter. Now they were speeding
along with little hope of stopping or turning, whatever they might
meet ahead. Over them was a lane of pale-blue sky, around them the
dark overshadowed River, and before them black, shutting out the
sun, the hills of Emyn Muil, in which no opening could be seen.
Frodo peering forward saw in the distance two great rocks
approaching: like great pinnacles or pillars of stone they seemed. Tall
and sheer and ominous they stood upon either side of the stream. A
narrow gap appeared between them, and the River swept the boats
towards it.
‘Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings!’ cried Aragorn.
‘We shall pass them soon. Keep the boats in line, and as far apart as
you can! Hold the middle of the stream!’
As Frodo was borne towards them the great pillars rose like towers
to meet him. Giants they seemed to him, vast grey ﬁgures silent but
threatening. Then he saw that they were indeed shaped and
fashioned: the craft and power of old had wrought upon them, and
still they preserved through the suns and rains of forgotten years the
mighty likenesses in which they had been hewn. Upon great pedestals
founded in the deep waters stood two great kings of stone: still with
blurred eyes and crannied brows they frowned upon the North. The
left hand of each was raised palm outwards in gesture of warning; in
each right hand there was an axe; upon each head there was a crumbling helm and crown. Great power and majesty they still wore, the
silent wardens of a long-vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon

THE GREAT RIVER

393

Frodo, and he cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to
look up as the boat drew near. Even Boromir bowed his head as the
boats whirled by, frail and ﬂeeting as little leaves, under the enduring
shadow of the sentinels of Númenor. So they passed into the dark
chasm of the Gates.
Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side.
Far off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and
a wind screamed over them. Frodo crouching over his knees heard
Sam in front muttering and groaning: ‘What a place! What a horrible
place! Just let me get out of this boat, and I’ll never wet my toes in
a puddle again, let alone a river!’
‘Fear not!’ said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned and saw
Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no
longer there. In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and
erect, guiding the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back,
and his dark hair was blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a
king returning from exile to his own land.
‘Fear not!’ he said. ‘Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses
of Isildur and Anárion, my sires of old. Under their shadow Elessar,
the Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House of Valandil Isildur’s son,
heir of Elendil, has naught to dread!’
Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: ‘Would
that Gandalf were here! How my heart yearns for Minas Anor and
the walls of my own city! But whither now shall I go?’
The chasm was long and dark, and ﬁlled with the noise of wind
and rushing water and echoing stone. It bent somewhat towards the
west so that at ﬁrst all was dark ahead; but soon Frodo saw a tall
gap of light before him, ever growing. Swiftly it drew near, and suddenly the boats shot through, out into a wide clear light.
The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy
sky. The pent waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale Nen
Hithoel, fenced by steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees,
but their heads were bare, cold-gleaming in the sunlight. At the far
southern end rose three peaks. The midmost stood somewhat forward
from the others and sundered from them, an island in the waters,
about which the ﬂowing River ﬂung pale shimmering arms. Distant
but deep there came up on the wind a roaring sound like the roll of
thunder heard far away.
‘Behold Tol Brandir!’ said Aragorn, pointing south to the tall peak.
‘Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen,
the Hills of Hearing and of Sight. In the days of the great kings there
were high seats upon them, and watch was kept there. But it is said
that no foot of man or beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir.

394

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Ere the shade of night falls we shall come to them. I hear the endless
voice of Rauros calling.’
The Company rested now for a while, drifting south on the current
that ﬂowed through the middle of the lake. They ate some food, and
then they took to their paddles and hastened on their way. The sides
of the westward hills fell into shadow, and the Sun grew round and
red. Here and there a misty star peered out. The three peaks loomed
before them, darkling in the twilight. Rauros was roaring with a great
voice. Already night was laid on the ﬂowing waters when the travellers
came at last under the shadow of the hills.
The tenth day of their journey was over. Wilderland was behind
them. They could go no further without choice between the east-way
and the west. The last stage of the Quest was before them.

Chapter 10
THE BREAKING OF
THE FELLOWSHIP
Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River. Here upon its western
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the
water from the feet of Amon Hen. Behind it rose the ﬁrst gentle
slopes of the hill clad with trees, and trees marched away westward
along the curving shores of the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down
and fed the grass.
‘Here we will rest tonight,’ said Aragorn. ‘This is the lawn of Parth
Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope that no
evil has yet come here.’
They drew up their boats on the green banks, and beside them
they made their camp. They set a watch, but had no sight nor sound
of their enemies. If Gollum had contrived to follow them, he remained
unseen and unheard. Nonetheless as the night wore on Aragorn grew
uneasy, tossing often in his sleep and waking. In the small hours he
got up and came to Frodo, whose turn it was to watch.
‘Why are you waking?’ asked Frodo. ‘It is not your watch.’
‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn; ‘but a shadow and a threat
has been growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.’
‘Why?’ said Frodo. ‘Are enemies at hand?’
‘Let us see what Sting may show,’ answered Aragorn.
Frodo then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the
edges gleamed dimly in the night. ‘Orcs!’ he said. ‘Not very near,
and yet too near, it seems.’
‘I feared as much,’ said Aragorn. ‘But maybe they are not on this
side of the River. The light of Sting is faint, and it may point to no
more than spies of Mordor roaming on the slopes of Amon Lhaw. I
have never heard before of Orcs upon Amon Hen. Yet who knows
what may happen in these evil days, now that Minas Tirith no longer
holds secure the passages of Anduin. We must go warily tomorrow.’
The day came like ﬁre and smoke. Low in the East there were
black bars of cloud like the fumes of a great burning. The rising sun
lit them from beneath with ﬂames of murky red; but soon it climbed
above them into a clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped
with gold. Frodo looked out eastward and gazed at the tall island.
Its sides sprang sheer out of the running water. High up above the

396

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

tall cliffs were steep slopes upon which trees climbed, mounting one
head above another; and above them again were grey faces of
inaccessible rock, crowned by a great spire of stone. Many birds were
circling about it, but no sign of other living things could be seen.
When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. ‘The
day has come at last,’ he said: ‘the day of choice which we have long
delayed. What shall now become of our Company that has travelled
so far in fellowship? Shall we turn west with Boromir and go to the
wars of Gondor; or turn east to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we
break our fellowship and go this way and that as each may choose?
Whatever we do must be done soon. We cannot long halt here. The
enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I fear that the Orcs may
already be on this side of the water.’
There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved.
‘Well, Frodo,’ said Aragorn at last. ‘I fear that the burden is laid
upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own
way you alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am
not Gandalf, and though I have tried to bear his part, I do not know
what design or hope he had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most
likely it seems that if he were here now the choice would still wait
on you. Such is your fate.’
Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. ‘I know that
haste is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me
an hour longer, and I will speak. Let me be alone!’
Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity. ‘Very well, Frodo son of
Drogo,’ he said. ‘You shall have an hour, and you shall be alone. We
will stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.’
Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had been
watching his master with great concern, shook his head and muttered:
‘Plain as a pikestaff it is, but it’s no good Sam Gamgee putting in
his spoke just now.’
Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while
the others restrained themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes
of Boromir followed Frodo intently, until he passed out of sight in
the trees at the foot of Amon Hen.
Wandering aimlessly at ﬁrst in the wood, Frodo found that his
feet were leading him up towards the slopes of the hill. He came to
a path, the dwindling ruins of a road of long ago. In steep places
stairs of stone had been hewn, but now they were cracked and worn,
and split by the roots of trees. For some while he climbed, not caring
which way he went, until he came to a grassy place. Rowan-trees
grew about it, and in the midst was a wide ﬂat stone. The little upland
lawn was open upon the East and was ﬁlled now with the early

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

397

sunlight. Frodo halted and looked out over the River, far below him,
to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air between
him and the untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros was a mighty roaring
mingled with a deep throbbing boom.
He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his hands,
staring eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened
since Bilbo left the Shire was passing through his mind, and he recalled and pondered everything that he could remember of Gandalf ’s
words. Time went on, and still he was no nearer to a choice.
Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to
him that something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon
him. He sprang up and turned; but all that he saw to his surprise
was Boromir, and his face was smiling and kind.
‘I was afraid for you, Frodo,’ he said, coming forward. ‘If Aragorn
is right and Orcs are near, then none of us should wander alone, and
you least of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too is heavy.
May I stay now and talk for a while, since I have found you? It would
comfort me. Where there are so many, all speech becomes a debate
without end. But two together may perhaps ﬁnd wisdom.’
‘You are kind,’ answered Frodo. ‘But I do not think that any
speech will help me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid
of doing it, Boromir: afraid.’
Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.
Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. ‘Are you sure that
you do not suffer needlessly?’ he said. ‘I wish to help you. You need
counsel in your hard choice. Will you not take mine?’
‘I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir,’
said Frodo. ‘And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of
my heart.’
‘Warning? Warning against what?’ said Boromir sharply.
‘Against delay. Against the way that seems easier. Against refusal
of the burden that is laid on me. Against – well, if it must be said,
against trust in the strength and truth of Men.’
‘Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your little
country, though you knew it not.’
‘I do not doubt the valour of your people. But the world is changing. The walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not strong
enough. If they fail, what then?’
‘We shall fall in battle valiantly. Yet there is still hope that they
will not fail.’
‘No hope while the Ring lasts,’ said Frodo.
‘Ah! The Ring!’ said Boromir, his eyes lighting. ‘The Ring! Is it
not a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for

398

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

so small a thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an
instant in the house of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again?’
Frodo looked up. His heart went suddenly cold. He caught the
strange gleam in Boromir’s eyes, yet his face was still kind and
friendly. ‘It is best that it should lie hidden,’ he answered.
‘As you wish. I care not,’ said Boromir. ‘Yet may I not even speak
of it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands of
the Enemy: of its evil uses not of its good. The world is changing,
you say. Minas Tirith will fall, if the Ring lasts. But why? Certainly,
if the Ring were with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us?’
‘Were you not at the Council?’ answered Frodo. ‘Because we
cannot use it, and what is done with it turns to evil.’
Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. ‘So you go on,’ he
cried. ‘Gandalf, Elrond – all these folk have taught you to say so.
For themselves they may be right. These elves and half-elves and
wizards, they would come to grief perhaps. Yet often I doubt if they
are wise and not merely timid. But each to his own kind. True-hearted
Men, they will not be corrupted. We of Minas Tirith have been
staunch through long years of trial. We do not desire the power of
wizard-lords, only strength to defend ourselves, strength in a just
cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the Ring of
Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad not
to use it, to use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless,
the ruthless, these alone will achieve victory. What could not a warrior
do in this hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if
he refuses, why not Boromir? The Ring would give me power of
Command. How I would drive the hosts of Mordor, and all men
would ﬂock to my banner!’
Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly. Almost
he seemed to have forgotten Frodo, while his talk dwelt on walls and
weapons, and the mustering of men; and he drew plans for great
alliances and glorious victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and
became himself a mighty king, benevolent and wise. Suddenly he
stopped and waved his arms.
‘And they tell us to throw it away!’ he cried. ‘I do not say destroy
it. That might be well, if reason could show any hope of doing so.
It does not. The only plan that is proposed to us is that a halﬂing
should walk blindly into Mordor and offer the Enemy every chance
of recapturing it for himself. Folly!
‘Surely you see it, my friend?’ he said, turning now suddenly to
Frodo again. ‘You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest
should pardon you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?’
‘No, I am afraid,’ said Frodo. ‘Simply afraid. But I am glad to
have heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.’

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

399

‘Then you will come to Minas Tirith?’ cried Boromir. His eyes
were shining and his face eager.
‘You misunderstand me,’ said Frodo.
‘But you will come, at least for a while?’ Boromir persisted. ‘My
city is not far now; and it is little further from there to Mordor than
from here. We have been long in the wilderness, and you need news
of what the Enemy is doing before you make a move. Come with
me, Frodo,’ he said. ‘You need rest before your venture, if go you
must.’ He laid his hand on the hobbit’s shoulder in friendly fashion;
but Frodo felt the hand trembling with suppressed excitement. He
stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the tall Man, nearly twice
his height and many times his match in strength.
‘Why are you so unfriendly?’ said Boromir. ‘I am a true man,
neither thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you know now; but
I give you my word that I do not desire to keep it. Will you not at
least let me make trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring!’
‘No! no!’ cried Frodo. ‘The Council laid it upon me to bear it.’
‘It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us,’ cried Boromir.
‘How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running wilfully to death
and ruining our cause. If any mortals have claim to the Ring, it is
the men of Númenor, and not Halﬂings. It is not yours save by
unhappy chance. It might have been mine. It should be mine. Give
it to me!’
Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great ﬂat stone
stood between them. ‘Come, come, my friend!’ said Boromir in a
softer voice. ‘Why not get rid of it? Why not be free of your doubt
and fear? You can lay the blame on me, if you will. You can say that
I was too strong and took it by force. For I am too strong for you,
halﬂing,’ he cried; and suddenly he sprang over the stone and leaped
at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face was hideously changed; a raging
ﬁre was in his eyes.
Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There
was only one thing he could do: trembling he pulled out the Ring
upon its chain and quickly slipped it on his ﬁnger, even as Boromir
sprang at him again. The Man gasped, stared for a moment amazed,
and then ran wildly about, seeking here and there among the rocks
and trees.
‘Miserable trickster!’ he shouted. ‘Let me get my hands on you!
Now I see your mind. You will take the Ring to Sauron and sell us
all. You have only waited your chance to leave us in the lurch. Curse
you and all halﬂings to death and darkness!’ Then, catching his foot
on a stone, he fell sprawling and lay upon his face. For a while he
was as still as if his own curse had struck him down; then suddenly
he wept.

400

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He rose and passed his hand over his eyes, dashing away the tears.
‘What have I said?’ he cried. ‘What have I done? Frodo, Frodo!’ he
called. ‘Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come
back!’
There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was
already far away, leaping blindly up the path to the hill-top. Terror
and grief shook him, seeing in his thought the mad ﬁerce face of
Boromir, and his burning eyes.
Soon he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted,
gasping for breath. He saw as through a mist a wide ﬂat circle, paved
with mighty ﬂags, and surrounded with a crumbling battlement; and
in the middle, set upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached
by a stair of many steps. Up he went and sat upon the ancient
chair, feeling like a lost child that had clambered upon the throne of
mountain-kings.
At ﬁrst he could see little. He seemed to be in a world of mist in
which there were only shadows: the Ring was upon him. Then here
and there the mist gave way and he saw many visions: small and
clear as if they were under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote.
There was no sound, only bright living images. The world seemed
to have shrunk and fallen silent. He was sitting upon the Seat of
Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men of Númenor.
Eastward he looked into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, and
forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great River lay
like a ribbon beneath him, and the Misty Mountains stood small and
hard as broken teeth. Westward he looked and saw the broad pastures
of Rohan; and Orthanc, the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike.
Southward he looked, and below his very feet the Great River curled
like a toppling wave and plunged over the falls of Rauros into a
foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the fume. And Ethir
Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of sea-birds
whirling like a white dust in the sun, and beneath them a green and
silver sea, rippling in endless lines.
But everywhere he looked he saw the signs of war. The Misty
Mountains were crawling like anthills: orcs were issuing out of a
thousand holes. Under the boughs of Mirkwood there was deadly
strife of Elves and Men and fell beasts. The land of the Beornings
was aﬂame; a cloud was over Moria; smoke rose on the borders of
Lórien.
Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan; wolves poured
from Isengard. From the havens of Harad ships of war put out to
sea; and out of the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen,
spearmen, bowmen upon horses, chariots of chieftains and laden

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

401

wains. All the power of the Dark Lord was in motion. Then turning
south again he beheld Minas Tirith. Far away it seemed, and beautiful: white-walled, many-towered, proud and fair upon its mountainseat; its battlements glittered with steel, and its turrets were bright
with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas
Tirith was set another fortress, greater and more strong. Thither,
eastward, unwilling his eye was drawn. It passed the ruined bridges
of Osgiliath, the grinning gates of Minas Morgul, and the haunted
Mountains, and it looked upon Gorgoroth, the valley of terror in the
Land of Mordor. Darkness lay there under the Sun. Fire glowed
amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, and a great reek rising.
Then at last his gaze was held: wall upon wall, battlement upon
battlement, black, immeasurably strong, mountain of iron, gate of
steel, tower of adamant, he saw it: Barad-dûr, Fortress of Sauron.
All hope left him.
And suddenly he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the Dark Tower
that did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze. A
ﬁerce eager will was there. It leaped towards him; almost like a ﬁnger
he felt it, searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know
just exactly where he was. Amon Lhaw it touched. It glanced upon
Tol Brandir – he threw himself from the seat, crouching, covering
his head with his grey hood.
He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily I come,
I come to you? He could not tell. Then as a ﬂash from some other
point of power there came to his mind another thought: Take it off !
Take it off ! Fool, take it off ! Take off the Ring!
The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly balanced
between their piercing points, he writhed, tormented. Suddenly he
was aware of himself again, Frodo, neither the Voice nor the Eye:
free to choose, and with one remaining instant in which to do so.
He took the Ring off his ﬁnger. He was kneeling in clear sunlight
before the high seat. A black shadow seemed to pass like an arm
above him; it missed Amon Hen and groped out west, and faded.
Then all the sky was clean and blue and birds sang in every tree.
Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but his will
was ﬁrm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. ‘I will do
now what I must,’ he said. ‘This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring
is already at work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave
them before it does more harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust,
and those I can trust are too dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry
and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart yearns for Minas Tirith, and he
will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen into evil. I will go alone.
At once.’
He went quickly down the path and came back to the lawn where

402

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Boromir had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he
could hear cries and calls from the woods near the shore below.
‘They’ll be hunting for me,’ he said. ‘I wonder how long I have
been away. Hours, I should think.’ He hesitated. ‘What can I do?’
he muttered. ‘I must go now or I shall never go. I shan’t get a chance
again. I hate leaving them, and like this without any explanation. But
surely they will understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?’
Slowly he drew out the Ring and put it on once more. He vanished
and passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind.
The others remained long by the river-side. For some time they
had been silent, moving restlessly about; but now they were sitting
in a circle, and they were talking. Every now and again they made
efforts to speak of other things, of their long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn concerning the realm of Gondor and
its ancient history, and the remnants of its great works that could
still be seen in this strange border-land of the Emyn Muil: the stone
kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great Stair beside the
falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words strayed back to
Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to do? Why was he
hesitating?
‘He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,’ said
Aragorn. ‘And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for
the Company to go east, since we have been tracked by Gollum, and
must fear that the secret of our journey is already betrayed. But Minas
Tirith is no nearer to the Fire and the destruction of the Burden.
‘We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but
the Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even
Elrond said was beyond his power: either to keep the Burden secret,
or to hold off the full might of the Enemy when he comes to take it.
Which way would any of us choose in Frodo’s place? I do not know.
Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.’
‘Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. ‘Yet we must needs make up
our minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo?
Let us call him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.’
‘And so should I,’ said Gimli. ‘We, of course, were only sent to
help the Bearer along the road, to go no further than we wished; and
none of us is under any oath or command to seek Mount Doom.
Hard was my parting from Lothlórien. Yet I have come so far, and
I say this: now we have reached the last choice, it is clear to me that
I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose Minas Tirith, but if he does
not, then I follow him.’
‘And I too will go with him,’ said Legolas. ‘It would be faithless
now to say farewell.’

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

403

‘It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,’ said Aragorn.
‘But if he goes east, then all need not go with him; nor do I think
that all should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as
for three or two, or one alone. If you would let me choose, then I
should appoint three companions: Sam, who could not bear it otherwise; and Gimli; and myself. Boromir will return to his own city,
where his father and his people need him; and with him the others
should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, if Legolas is not willing
to leave us.’
‘That won’t do at all!’ cried Merry. ‘We can’t leave Frodo! Pippin
and I always intended to go wherever he went, and we still do. But
we did not realize what that would mean. It seemed different so far
away, in the Shire or in Rivendell. It would be mad and cruel to let
Frodo go to Mordor. Why can’t we stop him?’
‘We must stop him,’ said Pippin. ‘And that is what he is worrying
about, I am sure. He knows we shan’t agree to his going east. And
he doesn’t like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine
it: going off to Mordor alone!’ Pippin shuddered. ‘But the dear silly
old hobbit, he ought to know that he hasn’t got to ask. He ought to
know that if we can’t stop him, we shan’t leave him.’
‘Begging your pardon,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t think you understand
my master at all. He isn’t hesitating about which way to go. Of course
not! What’s the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean,
begging your pardon, Master Boromir,’ he added, and turned. It was
then that they discovered that Boromir, who at ﬁrst had been sitting
silent on the outside of the circle, was no longer there.
‘Now where’s he got to?’ cried Sam, looking worried. ‘He’s been
a bit queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he’s not in this business.
He’s off to his home, as he always said; and no blame to him. But
Mr. Frodo, he knows he’s got to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom, if he can.
But he’s afraid. Now it’s come to the point, he’s just plain terriﬁed.
That’s what his trouble is. Of course he’s had a bit of schooling, so
to speak – we all have – since we left home, or he’d be so terriﬁed
he’d just ﬂing the Ring in the River and bolt. But he’s still too
frightened to start. And he isn’t worrying about us either: whether
we’ll go along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That’s another
thing that’s bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he’ll want
to go alone. Mark my words! We’re going to have trouble when he
comes back. For he’ll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name’s
Baggins.’
‘I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam,’ said
Aragorn. ‘And what shall we do, if you prove right?’
‘Stop him! Don’t let him go!’ cried Pippin.
‘I wonder?’ said Aragorn. ‘He is the Bearer, and the fate of the

404

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one
way or the other. Nor do I think that we should succeed, if we tried.
There are other powers at work far stronger.’
‘Well, I wish Frodo would ‘‘screw himself up’’ and come back,
and let us get it over,’ said Pippin. ‘This waiting is horrible! Surely
the time is up?’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn. ‘The hour is long passed. The morning is
wearing away. We must call for him.’
At that moment Boromir reappeared. He came out from the trees
and walked towards them without speaking. His face looked grim
and sad. He paused as if counting those that were present, and then
sat down aloof, with his eyes on the ground.
‘Where have you been, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn. ‘Have you seen
Frodo?’
Boromir hesitated for a second. ‘Yes, and no,’ he answered slowly.
‘Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged
him to come to Minas Tirith and not to go east. I grew angry and
he left me. He vanished. I have never seen such a thing happen
before, though I have heard of it in tales. He must have put the Ring
on. I could not ﬁnd him again. I thought he would return to you.’
‘Is that all that you have to say?’ said Aragorn, looking hard and
not too kindly at Boromir.
‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘I will say no more yet.’
‘This is bad!’ cried Sam, jumping up. ‘I don’t know what this Man
has been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on? He didn’t
ought to have; and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!’
‘But he wouldn’t keep it on,’ said Merry. ‘Not when he had
escaped the unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.’
‘But where did he go? Where is he?’ cried Pippin. ‘He’s been away
ages now.’
‘How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn.
‘Half an hour, maybe,’ he answered. ‘Or it might be an hour. I
have wandered for some time since. I do not know! I do not know!’
He put his head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.
‘An hour since he vanished!’ shouted Sam. ‘We must try and ﬁnd
him at once. Come on!’
‘Wait a moment!’ cried Aragorn. ‘We must divide up into pairs,
and arrange – here, hold on! Wait!’
It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed off
ﬁrst. Merry and Pippin had followed, and were already disappearing
westward into the trees by the shore, shouting: Frodo! Frodo! in their
clear, high, hobbit-voices. Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden
panic or madness seemed to have fallen on the Company.

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

405

‘We shall all be scattered and lost,’ groaned Aragorn. ‘Boromir! I
do not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help
now! Go after those two young hobbits, and guard them at the least,
even if you cannot ﬁnd Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you ﬁnd
him, or any traces of him. I shall return soon.’
Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. Just as
he reached the little lawn among the rowans he overtook him, toiling
uphill, panting and calling, Frodo!
‘Come with me, Sam!’ he said. ‘None of us should be alone. There
is mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon
Hen, to see what may be seen. And look! It is as my heart guessed,
Frodo went this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open!’ He sped
up the path.
Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger,
and soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out
of sight ahead. Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his
hand to his head.
‘Whoa, Sam Gamgee!’ he said aloud. ‘Your legs are too short, so
use your head! Let me see now! Boromir isn’t lying, that’s not his
way; but he hasn’t told us everything. Something scared Mr. Frodo
badly. He screwed himself up to the point, sudden. He made up his
mind at last – to go. Where to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes,
without even his Sam. That’s hard, cruel hard.’
Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the tears.
‘Steady, Gamgee!’ he said. ‘Think, if you can! He can’t ﬂy across
rivers, and he can’t jump waterfalls. He’s got no gear. So he’s got to
get back to the boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like
lightning!’
Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his
knees. Up he got and ran on. He came to the edge of the lawn of
Parth Galen by the shore, where the boats were drawn up out of the
water. No one was there. There seemed to be cries in the woods
behind, but he did not heed them. He stood gazing for a moment,
stock-still, gaping. A boat was sliding down the bank all by itself.
With a shout Sam raced across the grass. The boat slipped into the
water.
‘Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming!’ called Sam, and ﬂung himself
from the bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a
yard. With a cry and a splash he fell face downward into deep swift
water. Gurgling he went under, and the River closed over his curly
head.
An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle
swirled and the boat put about. Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam

414

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

broken near the hilt; his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many
Orcs lay slain, piled all about him and at his feet.
Aragorn knelt beside him. Boromir opened his eyes and strove to
speak. At last slow words came. ‘I tried to take the Ring from Frodo,’ he
said. ‘I am sorry. I have paid.’ His glance strayed to his fallen enemies;
twenty at least lay there. ‘They have gone: the Halﬂings: the Orcs have
taken them. I think they are not dead. Orcs bound them.’ He paused
and his eyes closed wearily. After a moment he spoke again.
‘Farewell, Aragorn! Go to Minas Tirith and save my people! I
have failed.’
‘No!’ said Aragorn, taking his hand and kissing his brow. ‘You
have conquered. Few have gained such a victory. Be at peace! Minas
Tirith shall not fall!’
Boromir smiled.
‘Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?’ said Aragorn.
But Boromir did not speak again.
‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Thus passes the heir of Denethor, Lord of
the Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all
in ruin. It is I that have failed. Vain was Gandalf ’s trust in me. What
shall I do now? Boromir has laid it on me to go to Minas Tirith, and
my heart desires it; but where are the Ring and the Bearer? How
shall I ﬁnd them and save the Quest from disaster?’
He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir’s
hand. So it was that Legolas and Gimli found him. They came from
the western slopes of the hill, silently, creeping through the trees as
if they were hunting. Gimli had his axe in hand, and Legolas his long
knife: all his arrows were spent. When they came into the glade they
halted in amazement; and then they stood a moment with heads
bowed in grief, for it seemed to them plain what had happened.
‘Alas!’ said Legolas, coming to Aragorn’s side. ‘We have hunted
and slain many Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more
use here. We came when we heard the horn – but too late, it seems.
I fear you have taken deadly hurt.’
‘Boromir is dead,’ said Aragorn. ‘I am unscathed, for I was not
here with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon
the hill.’
‘The hobbits!’ cried Gimli. ‘Where are they then? Where is Frodo?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn wearily. ‘Before he died
Boromir told me that the Orcs had bound them; he did not think
that they were dead. I sent him to follow Merry and Pippin; but I did
not ask him if Frodo or Sam were with him: not until it was too late.
All that I have done today has gone amiss. What is to be done now?’
‘First we must tend the fallen,’ said Legolas. ‘We cannot leave
him lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.’

THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR

415

‘But we must be swift,’ said Gimli. ‘He would not wish us to
linger. We must follow the Orcs, if there is hope that any of our
Company are living prisoners.’
‘But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them or
not,’ said Aragorn. ‘Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him
ﬁrst? An evil choice is now before us!’
‘Then let us do ﬁrst what we must do,’ said Legolas. ‘We have
not the time or the tools to bury our comrade ﬁtly, or to raise a
mound over him. A cairn we might build.’
‘The labour would be hard and long: there are no stones that we
could use nearer than the water-side,’ said Gimli.
‘Then let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons
of his vanquished foes,’ said Aragorn. ‘We will send him to the Falls
of Rauros and give him to Anduin. The River of Gondor will take
care at least that no evil creature dishonours his bones.’
Quickly they searched the bodies of the Orcs, gathering their
swords and cloven helms and shields into a heap.
‘See!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Here we ﬁnd tokens!’ He picked out from
the pile of grim weapons two knives, leaf-bladed, damasked in gold
and red; and searching further he found also the sheaths, black, set
with small red gems. ‘No orc-tools these!’ he said. ‘They were borne
by the hobbits. Doubtless the Orcs despoiled them, but feared to
keep the knives, knowing them for what they are: work of Westernesse, wound about with spells for the bane of Mordor. Well, now,
if they still live, our friends are weaponless. I will take these things,
hoping against hope, to give them back.’
‘And I,’ said Legolas, ‘will take all the arrows that I can ﬁnd, for
my quiver is empty.’ He searched in the pile and on the ground about
and found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft
than such arrows as the Orcs were accustomed to use. He looked at
them closely.
And Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: ‘Here lie many that
are not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, from the Misty
Mountains, if I know anything of Orcs and their kinds. And here are
others strange to me. Their gear is not after the manner of Orcs at
all!’
There were four goblin-soldiers of greater stature, swart, slanteyed, with thick legs and large hands. They were armed with short
broad-bladed swords, not with the curved scimitars usual with Orcs;
and they had bows of yew, in length and shape like the bows of Men.
Upon their shields they bore a strange device: a small white hand in
the centre of a black ﬁeld; on the front of their iron helms was set
an S-rune, wrought of some white metal.

416

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I have not seen these tokens before,’ said Aragorn. ‘What do they
mean?’
‘S is for Sauron,’ said Gimli. ‘That is easy to read.’
‘Nay!’ said Legolas. ‘Sauron does not use the elf-runes.’
‘Neither does he use his right name, nor permit it to be spelt or
spoken,’ said Aragorn. ‘And he does not use white. The Orcs in the
service of Barad-dûr use the sign of the Red Eye.’ He stood for a
moment in thought. ‘S is for Saruman, I guess,’ he said at length.
‘There is evil afoot in Isengard, and the West is no longer safe. It is
as Gandalf feared: by some means the traitor Saruman has had news
of our journey. It is likely too that he knows of Gandalf ’s fall. Pursuers
from Moria may have escaped the vigilance of Lórien, or they may
have avoided that land and come to Isengard by other paths. Orcs
travel fast. But Saruman has many ways of learning news. Do you
remember the birds?’
‘Well, we have no time to ponder riddles,’ said Gimli. ‘Let us bear
Boromir away!’
‘But after that we must guess the riddles, if we are to choose our
course rightly,’ answered Aragorn.
‘Maybe there is no right choice,’ said Gimli.
Taking his axe the Dwarf now cut several branches. These they
lashed together with bowstrings, and spread their cloaks upon the
frame. Upon this rough bier they carried the body of their companion
to the shore, together with such trophies of his last battle as they
chose to send forth with him. It was only a short way, yet they found
it no easy task, for Boromir was a man both tall and strong.
At the water-side Aragorn remained, watching the bier, while
Legolas and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth Galen. It was a
mile or more, and it was some time before they came back, paddling
two boats swiftly along the shore.
‘There is a strange tale to tell!’ said Legolas. ‘There are only two
boats upon the bank. We could ﬁnd no trace of the other.’
‘Have Orcs been there?’ asked Aragorn.
‘We saw no signs of them,’ answered Gimli. ‘And Orcs would
have taken or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.’
‘I will look at the ground when we come there,’ said Aragorn.
Now they laid Boromir in the middle of the boat that was to bear
him away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed
beneath his head. They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it
upon his shoulders. The golden belt of Lórien gleamed about his
waist. His helm they set beside him, and across his lap they laid the
cloven horn and the hilt and shards of his sword; beneath his feet

THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR

417

they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening the prow to the
stern of the other boat, they drew him out into the water. They rowed
sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift-running channel
they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The steep sides of Tol
Brandir were glowing: it was now mid-afternoon. As they went south
the fume of Rauros rose and shimmered before them, a haze of gold.
The rush and thunder of the falls shook the windless air.
Sorrowfully they cast loose the funeral boat: there Boromir lay,
restful, peaceful, gliding upon the bosom of the ﬂowing water. The
stream took him while they held their own boat back with their
paddles. He ﬂoated by them, and slowly his boat departed, waning
to a dark spot against the golden light; and then suddenly it vanished.
Rauros roared on unchanging. The River had taken Boromir son of
Denethor, and he was not seen again in Minas Tirith, standing as
he used to stand upon the White Tower in the morning. But in
Gondor in after-days it long was said that the elven-boat rode the
falls and the foaming pool, and bore him down through Osgiliath,
and past the many mouths of Anduin, out into the Great Sea at night
under the stars.
For a while the three companions remained silent, gazing after
him. Then Aragorn spoke. ‘They will look for him from the White
Tower,’ he said, ‘but he will not return from mountain or from sea.’
Then slowly he began to sing:
Through Rohan over fen and ﬁeld where the long grass grows
The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes.
‘What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to
me tonight?
Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?’
‘I saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and grey;
I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away
Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more.
The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of
Denethor.’
‘O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar,
But you came not from the empty lands where no men are.’
Then Legolas sang:
From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind ﬂies, from the
sandhills and the stones;
The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans.

418

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me
at eve?
Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve.’
‘Ask not of me where he doth dwell – so many bones there lie
On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky;
So many have passed down Anduin to ﬁnd the ﬂowing Sea.
Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to
me!’
‘O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south,
But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea’s
mouth.’
Then Aragorn sang again:
From the Gate of Kings the North Wind rides, and past the
roaring falls;
And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls.
‘What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me
today?
What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away.’
‘Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he fought.
His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water brought.
His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest;
And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon its breast.’
‘O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze
To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end of days.’
So they ended. Then they turned their boat and drove it with all
the speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen.
‘You left the East Wind to me,’ said Gimli, ‘but I will say naught
of it.’
‘That is as it should be,’ said Aragorn. ‘In Minas Tirith they endure
the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boromir
has taken his road, and we must make haste to choose our own.’
He surveyed the green lawn, quickly but thoroughly, stooping
often to the earth. ‘No Orcs have been on this ground,’ he said.
‘Otherwise nothing can be made out for certain. All our footprints
are here, crossing and re-crossing. I cannot tell whether any of the
hobbits have come back since the search for Frodo began.’ He
returned to the bank, close to where the rill from the spring trickled
out into the River. ‘There are some clear prints here,’ he said. ‘A
hobbit waded out into the water and back; but I cannot say how long
ago.’
‘How then do you read this riddle?’ asked Gimli.

THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR

419

Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the campingplace and looked at the baggage. ‘Two packs are missing,’ he said,
‘and one is certainly Sam’s: it was rather large and heavy. This then
is the answer: Frodo has gone by boat, and his servant has gone with
him. Frodo must have returned while we were all away. I met Sam
going up the hill and told him to follow me; but plainly he did not
do so. He guessed his master’s mind and came back here before
Frodo had gone. He did not ﬁnd it easy to leave Sam behind!’
‘But why should he leave us behind, and without a word?’ said
Gimli. ‘That was a strange deed!’
‘And a brave deed,’ said Aragorn. ‘Sam was right, I think. Frodo
did not wish to lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he
knew that he must go himself. Something happened after he left us
that overcame his fear and doubt.’
‘Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he ﬂed,’ said Legolas.
‘He ﬂed, certainly,’ said Aragorn, ‘but not, I think, from Orcs.’
What he thought was the cause of Frodo’s sudden resolve and ﬂight
Aragorn did not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret.
‘Well, so much at least is now clear,’ said Legolas: ‘Frodo is no
longer on this side of the River: only he can have taken the boat.
And Sam is with him; only he would have taken his pack.’
‘Our choice then,’ said Gimli, ‘is either to take the remaining boat
and follow Frodo, or else to follow the Orcs on foot. There is little
hope either way. We have already lost precious hours.’
‘Let me think!’ said Aragorn. ‘And now may I make a right choice,
and change the evil fate of this unhappy day!’ He stood silent for a
moment. ‘I will follow the Orcs,’ he said at last. ‘I would have guided
Frodo to Mordor and gone with him to the end; but if I seek him
now in the wilderness, I must abandon the captives to torment and
death. My heart speaks clearly at last: the fate of the Bearer is in my
hands no longer. The Company has played its part. Yet we that
remain cannot forsake our companions while we have strength left.
Come! We will go now. Leave all that can be spared behind! We will
press on by day and dark!’
They drew up the last boat and carried it to the trees. They laid
beneath it such of their goods as they did not need and could not
carry away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading
as they came back to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they
picked up the trail of the Orcs. It needed little skill to ﬁnd.
‘No other folk make such a trampling,’ said Legolas. ‘It seems
their delight to slash and beat down growing things that are not even
in their way.’
‘But they go with a great speed for all that,’ said Aragorn, ‘and

420

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

they do not tire. And later we may have to search for our path in
hard bare lands.’
‘Well, after them!’ said Gimli. ‘Dwarves too can go swiftly, and
they do not tire sooner than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they
have a long start.’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘we shall all need the endurance of Dwarves.
But come! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of
our enemies. And woe to them, if we prove the swifter! We will
make such a chase as shall be accounted a marvel among the Three
Kindreds: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Forth the Three Hunters!’
Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and
on he led them, tireless and swift, now that his mind was at last made
up. The woods about the lake they left behind. Long slopes they
climbed, dark, hard-edged against the sky already red with sunset.
Dusk came. They passed away, grey shadows in a stony land.

Chapter 2
THE RIDERS OF ROHAN
Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and
brooded on the pale margins of the Anduin, but the sky was clear.
Stars came out. The waxing moon was riding in the West, and the
shadows of the rocks were black. They had come to the feet of stony
hills, and their pace was slower, for the trail was no longer easy to
follow. Here the highlands of the Emyn Muil ran from North to
South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of each ridge
was steep and difﬁcult, but the eastward slopes were gentler, furrowed
with many gullies and narrow ravines. All night the three companions
scrambled in this bony land, climbing to the crest of the ﬁrst and
tallest ridge, and down again into the darkness of a deep winding
valley on the other side.
There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief
space. The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glittered
above them; the ﬁrst light of day had not yet come over the dark
hills behind. For the moment Aragorn was at a loss: the orc-trail had
descended into the valley, but there it had vanished.
‘Which way would they turn, do you think?’ said Legolas. ‘Northward to take a straighter road to Isengard, or Fangorn, if that is their
aim as you guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?’
‘They will not make for the river, whatever mark they aim at,’
said Aragorn. ‘And unless there is much amiss in Rohan and the
power of Saruman is greatly increased, they will take the shortest
way that they can ﬁnd over the ﬁelds of the Rohirrim. Let us search
northwards!’
The dale ran like a stony trough between the ridged hills, and a
trickling stream ﬂowed among the boulders at the bottom. A cliff
frowned upon their right; to their left rose grey slopes, dim and
shadowy in the late night. They went on for a mile or more northwards. Aragorn was searching, bent towards the ground, among the
folds and gullies leading up into the western ridge. Legolas was some
way ahead. Suddenly the Elf gave a cry and the others came running
towards him.
‘We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting,’
he said. ‘Look!’ He pointed, and they saw that what they had at ﬁrst
taken to be boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled
bodies. Five dead Orcs lay there. They had been hewn with many

422

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

cruel strokes, and two had been beheaded. The ground was wet with
their dark blood.
‘Here is another riddle!’ said Gimli. ‘But it needs the light of day,
and for that we cannot wait.’
‘Yet however you read it, it seems not unhopeful,’ said Legolas.
‘Enemies of the Orcs are likely to be our friends. Do any folk dwell
in these hills?’
‘No,’ said Aragorn. ‘The Rohirrim seldom come here, and it is
far from Minas Tirith. It might be that some company of Men were
hunting here for reasons that we do not know. Yet I think not.’
‘What do you think?’ said Gimli.
‘I think that the enemy brought his own enemy with him,’
answered Aragorn. ‘These are Northern Orcs from far away. Among
the slain are none of the great Orcs with the strange badges. There
was a quarrel, I guess: it is no uncommon thing with these foul folk.
Maybe there was some dispute about the road.’
‘Or about the captives,’ said Gimli. ‘Let us hope that they, too,
did not meet their end here.’
Aragorn searched the ground in a wide circle, but no other traces
of the ﬁght could be found. They went on. Already the eastward sky
was turning pale; the stars were fading, and a grey light was slowly
growing. A little further north they came to a fold in which a tiny
stream, falling and winding, had cut a stony path down into the
valley. In it some bushes grew, and there were patches of grass upon
its sides.
‘At last!’ said Aragorn. ‘Here are the tracks that we seek! Up this
water-channel: this is the way that the Orcs went after their debate.’
Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path. As if
fresh from a night’s rest they sprang from stone to stone. At last they
reached the crest of the grey hill, and a sudden breeze blew in their
hair and stirred their cloaks: the chill wind of dawn.
Turning back they saw across the River the far hills kindled. Day
leaped into the sky. The red rim of the sun rose over the shoulders
of the dark land. Before them in the West the world lay still, formless
and grey; but even as they looked, the shadows of night melted, the
colours of the waking earth returned: green ﬂowed over the wide
meads of Rohan; the white mists shimmered in the water-vales; and
far off to the left, thirty leagues or more, blue and purple stood the
White Mountains, rising into peaks of jet, tipped with glimmering
snows, ﬂushed with the rose of morning.
‘Gondor! Gondor!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Would that I looked on you
again in happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your
bright streams.

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

423

Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea!
West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree
Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old.
O proud walls! White towers! O wingéd crown and throne of gold!
O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree,
Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea?
Now let us go!’ he said, drawing his eyes away from the South, and
looking out west and north to the way that he must tread.
The ridge upon which the companions stood went down steeply
before their feet. Below it twenty fathoms or more, there was a wide
and rugged shelf which ended suddenly in the brink of a sheer cliff: the
East Wall of Rohan. So ended the Emyn Muil, and the green plains of
the Rohirrim stretched away before them to the edge of sight.
‘Look!’ cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them.
‘There is the eagle again! He is very high. He seems to be ﬂying now
away, from this land back to the North. He is going with great speed.
Look!’
‘No, not even my eyes can see him, my good Legolas,’ said
Aragorn. ‘He must be far aloft indeed. I wonder what is his errand,
if he is the same bird that I have seen before. But look! I can see
something nearer at hand and more urgent; there is something
moving over the plain!’
‘Many things,’ said Legolas. ‘It is a great company on foot; but I
cannot say more, nor see what kind of folk they may be. They are
many leagues away: twelve, I guess; but the ﬂatness of the plain is
hard to measure.’
‘I think, nonetheless, that we no longer need any trail to tell us
which way to go,’ said Gimli. ‘Let us ﬁnd a path down to the ﬁelds
as quick as may be.’
‘I doubt if you will ﬁnd a path quicker than the one that the Orcs
chose,’ said Aragorn.
They followed their enemies now by the clear light of day. It
seemed that the Orcs had pressed on with all possible speed. Every
now and again the pursuers found things that had been dropped or
cast away: food-bags, the rinds and crusts of hard grey bread, a torn
black cloak, a heavy iron-nailed shoe broken on the stones. The trail
led them north along the top of the escarpment, and at length they
came to a deep cleft carved in the rock by a stream that splashed
noisily down. In the narrow ravine a rough path descended like a
steep stair into the plain.
At the bottom they came with a strange suddenness on the grass
of Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Emyn

424

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Muil. The falling stream vanished into a deep growth of cresses and
water-plants, and they could hear it tinkling away in green tunnels,
down long gentle slopes towards the fens of Entwash Vale far away.
They seemed to have left winter clinging to the hills behind. Here
the air was softer and warmer, and faintly scented, as if spring was
already stirring and the sap was ﬂowing again in herb and leaf. Legolas
took a deep breath, like one that drinks a great draught after long
thirst in barren places.
‘Ah! the green smell!’ he said. ‘It is better than much sleep. Let
us run!’
‘Light feet may run swiftly here,’ said Aragorn. ‘More swiftly,
maybe, than iron-shod Orcs. Now we have a chance to lessen their
lead!’
They went in single ﬁle, running like hounds on a strong scent,
and an eager light was in their eyes. Nearly due west the broad swath
of the marching Orcs tramped its ugly slot; the sweet grass of Rohan
had been bruised and blackened as they passed. Presently Aragorn
gave a cry and turned aside.
‘Stay!’ he shouted. ‘Do not follow me yet!’ He ran quickly to the
right, away from the main trail; for he had seen footprints that went
that way, branching off from the others, the marks of small unshod
feet. These, however, did not go far before they were crossed by
orc-prints, also coming out from the main trail behind and in front,
and then they curved sharply back again and were lost in the trampling. At the furthest point Aragorn stooped and picked up something
from the grass; then he ran back.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘they are quite plain: a hobbit’s footprints. Pippin’s,
I think. He is smaller than the others. And look at this!’ He held up
a thing that glittered in the sunlight. It looked like the new-opened
leaf of a beech-tree, fair and strange in that treeless plain.
‘The brooch of an elven-cloak!’ cried Legolas and Gimli together.
‘Not idly do the leaves of Lórien fall,’ said Aragorn. ‘This did not
drop by chance: it was cast away as a token to any that might follow.
I think Pippin ran away from the trail for that purpose.’
‘Then he at least was alive,’ said Gimli. ‘And he had the use of
his wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue
in vain.’
‘Let us hope that he did not pay too dearly for his boldness,’ said
Legolas. ‘Come! Let us go on! The thought of those merry young
folk driven like cattle burns my heart.’
The sun climbed to the noon and then rode slowly down the sky.
Light clouds came up out of the sea in the distant South and were

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

425

blown away upon the breeze. The sun sank. Shadows rose behind
and reached out long arms from the East. Still the hunters held on.
One day now had passed since Boromir fell, and the Orcs were yet
far ahead. No longer could any sight of them be seen in the level
plains.
As nightshade was closing about them Aragorn halted. Only twice
in the day’s march had they rested for a brief while, and twelve
leagues now lay between them and the eastern wall where they had
stood at dawn.
‘We have come at last to a hard choice,’ he said. ‘Shall we rest by
night, or shall we go on while our will and strength hold?’
‘Unless our enemies rest also, they will leave us far behind, if we
stay to sleep,’ said Legolas.
‘Surely even Orcs must pause on the march?’ said Gimli.
‘Seldom will Orcs journey in the open under the sun, yet these
have done so,’ said Legolas. ‘Certainly they will not rest by night.’
‘But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,’ said Gimli.
‘The trail is straight, and turns neither right nor left, as far as my
eyes can see,’ said Legolas.
‘Maybe, I could lead you at guess in the darkness and hold to the
line,’ said Aragorn; ‘but if we strayed, or they turned aside, then
when light came there might be long delay before the trail was found
again.’
‘And there is this also,’ said Gimli: ‘only by day can we see if any
tracks lead away. If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be
carried off, eastward, say, to the Great River, towards Mordor, we
might pass the signs and never know it.’
‘That is true,’ said Aragorn. ‘But if I read the signs back yonder
rightly, the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole company
is now bound for Isengard. Their present course bears me out.’
‘Yet it would be rash to be sure of their counsels,’ said Gimli.
‘And what of escape? In the dark we should have passed the signs
that led you to the brooch.’
‘The Orcs will be doubly on their guard since then, and the
prisoners even wearier,’ said Legolas. ‘There will be no escape again,
if we do not contrive it. How that is to be done cannot be guessed,
but ﬁrst we must overtake them.’
‘And yet even I, Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy
of my folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause,’
said Gimli. ‘My heart burns me too, and I would have started sooner;
but now I must rest a little to run the better. And if we rest, then
the blind night is the time to do so.’
‘I said that it was a hard choice,’ said Aragorn. ‘How shall we end
this debate?’

426

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘You are our guide,’ said Gimli, ‘and you are skilled in the chase.
You shall choose.’
‘My heart bids me go on,’ said Legolas. ‘But we must hold
together. I will follow your counsel.’
‘You give the choice to an ill chooser,’ said Aragorn. ‘Since we
passed through the Argonath my choices have gone amiss.’ He fell
silent, gazing north and west into the gathering night for a long while.
‘We will not walk in the dark,’ he said at length. ‘The peril of
missing the trail or signs of other coming and going seems to me the
greater. If the Moon gave enough light, we would use it, but alas! he
sets early and is yet young and pale.’
‘And tonight he is shrouded anyway,’ Gimli murmured. ‘Would
that the Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!’
‘It will be more needed where it is bestowed,’ said Aragorn. ‘With
him lies the true Quest. Ours is but a small matter in the great deeds
of this time. A vain pursuit from its beginning, maybe, which no
choice of mine can mar or mend. Well, I have chosen. So let us use
the time as best we may!’
He cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, for he
had not slept since their night under the shadow of Tol Brandir.
Before dawn was in the sky he woke and rose. Gimli was still deep
in slumber, but Legolas was standing, gazing northwards into the
darkness, thoughtful and silent as a young tree in a windless night.
‘They are far far away,’ he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. ‘I know
in my heart that they have not rested this night. Only an eagle could
overtake them now.’
‘Nonetheless we will still follow as we may,’ said Aragorn. Stooping
he roused the Dwarf. ‘Come! We must go,’ he said. ‘The scent is
growing cold.’
‘But it is still dark,’ said Gimli. ‘Even Legolas on a hill-top could
not see them till the Sun is up.’
‘I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under
moon or sun,’ said Legolas.
‘Where sight fails the earth may bring us rumour,’ said Aragorn.
‘The land must groan under their hated feet.’ He stretched himself
upon the ground with his ear pressed against the turf. He lay there
motionless, for so long a time that Gimli wondered if he had swooned
or fallen asleep again. Dawn came glimmering, and slowly a grey
light grew about them. At last he rose, and now his friends could see
his face: it was pale and drawn, and his look was troubled.
‘The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,’ he said. ‘Nothing
walks upon it for many miles about us. Faint and far are the feet of
our enemies. But loud are the hoofs of the horses. It comes to my

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

427

mind that I heard them, even as I lay on the ground in sleep, and
they troubled my dreams: horses galloping, passing in the West. But
now they are drawing ever further from us, riding northward. I
wonder what is happening in this land!’
‘Let us go!’ said Legolas.
So the third day of their pursuit began. During all its long hours
of cloud and ﬁtful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now running,
as if no weariness could quench the ﬁre that burned them. They
seldom spoke. Over the wide solitude they passed and their elvencloaks faded against the background of the grey-green ﬁelds; even in
the cool sunlight of mid-day few but Elvish eyes would have marked
them, until they were close at hand. Often in their hearts they thanked
the Lady of Lórien for the gift of lembas, for they could eat of it and
ﬁnd new strength even as they ran.
All day the track of their enemies led straight on, going north-west
without a break or turn. As once again the day wore to its end they
came to long treeless slopes, where the land rose, swelling up towards
a line of low humpbacked downs ahead. The orc-trail grew fainter
as it bent north towards them, for the ground became harder and
the grass shorter. Far away to the left the river Entwash wound, a
silver thread in a green ﬂoor. No moving thing could be seen. Often
Aragorn wondered that they saw no sign of beast or man. The dwellings of the Rohirrim were for the most part many leagues away to
the South, under the wooded eaves of the White Mountains, now
hidden in mist and cloud; yet the Horse-lords had formerly kept
many herds and studs in the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their
realm, and there the herdsmen had wandered much, living in camp
and tent, even in winter-time. But now all the land was empty, and
there was a silence that did not seem to be the quiet of peace.
At dusk they halted again. Now twice twelve leagues they had
passed over the plains of Rohan and the wall of the Emyn Muil was
lost in the shadows of the East. The young moon was glimmering in
a misty sky, but it gave small light, and the stars were veiled.
‘Now do I most grudge a time of rest or any halt in our chase,’
said Legolas. ‘The Orcs have run before us, as if the very whips of
Sauron were behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest
and the dark hills, and even now are passing into the shadows of the
trees.’
Gimli ground his teeth. ‘This is a bitter end to our hope and to
all our toil!’ he said.
‘To hope, maybe, but not to toil,’ said Aragorn. ‘We shall not
turn back here. Yet I am weary.’ He gazed back along the way that

428

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

they had come towards the night gathering in the East. ‘There is
something strange at work in this land. I distrust the silence. I distrust
even the pale Moon. The stars are faint; and I am weary as I have
seldom been before, weary as no Ranger should be with a clear trail
to follow. There is some will that lends speed to our foes and sets
an unseen barrier before us: a weariness that is in the heart more
than in the limb.’
‘Truly!’ said Legolas. ‘That I have known since ﬁrst we came down
from the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us but before us.’
He pointed away over the land of Rohan into the darkling West under
the sickle moon.
‘Saruman!’ muttered Aragorn. ‘But he shall not turn us back! Halt
we must once more; for, see! even the Moon is falling into gathering
cloud. But north lies our road between down and fen when day
returns.’
As before Legolas was ﬁrst afoot, if indeed he had ever slept.
‘Awake! Awake!’ he cried. ‘It is a red dawn. Strange things await us
by the eaves of the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are
called. Awake!’
The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off again. Slowly
the downs drew near. It was still an hour before noon when they
reached them: green slopes rising to bare ridges that ran in a line
straight towards the North. At their feet the ground was dry and the
turf short, but a long strip of sunken land, some ten miles wide, lay
between them and the river wandering deep in dim thickets of reed
and rush. Just to the West of the southernmost slope there was a great
ring, where the turf had been torn and beaten by many trampling feet.
From it the orc-trail ran out again, turning north along the dry skirts
of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined the tracks closely.
‘They rested here a while,’ he said, ‘but even the outward trail is
already old. I fear that your heart spoke truly, Legolas: it is thrice
twelve hours, I guess, since the Orcs stood where we now stand. If
they held to their pace, then at sundown yesterday they would reach
the borders of Fangorn.’
‘I can see nothing away north or west but grass dwindling into
mist,’ said Gimli. ‘Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?’
‘It is still far away,’ said Aragorn. ‘If I remember rightly, these
downs run eight leagues or more to the north, and then north-west
to the issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land, another
ﬁfteen leagues it may be.’
‘Well, let us go on,’ said Gimli. ‘My legs must forget the miles.
They would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.’
*
*
*

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

429

The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the end of the
line of downs. For many hours they had marched without rest. They
were going slowly now, and Gimli’s back was bent. Stone-hard are
the Dwarves in labour or journey, but this endless chase began to
tell on him, as all hope failed in his heart. Aragorn walked behind
him, grim and silent, stooping now and again to scan some print or
mark upon the ground. Only Legolas still stepped as lightly as ever,
his feet hardly seeming to press the grass, leaving no footprints as he
passed; but in the waybread of the Elves he found all the sustenance
that he needed, and he could sleep, if sleep it could be called by
Men, resting his mind in the strange paths of Elvish dreams, even as
he walked open-eyed in the light of this world.
‘Let us go up on to this green hill!’ he said. Wearily they followed
him, climbing the long slope, until they came out upon the top. It was
a round hill smooth and bare, standing by itself, the most northerly of
the downs. The sun sank and the shadows of evening fell like a
curtain. They were alone in a grey formless world without mark or
measure. Only far away north-west there was a deeper darkness
against the dying light: the Mountains of Mist and the forest at their
feet.
‘Nothing can we see to guide us here,’ said Gimli. ‘Well, now we
must halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!’
‘The wind is north from the snows,’ said Aragorn.
‘And ere morning it will be in the East,’ said Legolas. ‘But rest,
if you must. Yet do not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown.
Rede oft is found at the rising of the Sun.’
‘Three suns already have risen on our chase and brought no
counsel,’ said Gimli.
The night grew ever colder. Aragorn and Gimli slept ﬁtfully, and
whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing beside them, or
walking to and fro, singing softly to himself in his own tongue, and
as he sang the white stars opened in the hard black vault above. So
the night passed. Together they watched the dawn grow slowly in
the sky, now bare and cloudless, until at last the sunrise came. It was
pale and clear. The wind was in the East and all the mists had rolled
away; wide lands lay bleak about them in the bitter light.
Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the Wold of
Rohan that they had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great
River. North-westward stalked the dark forest of Fangorn; still ten
leagues away stood its shadowy eaves, and its further slopes faded
into the distant blue. Beyond there glimmered far away, as if ﬂoating
on a grey cloud, the white head of tall Methedras, the last peak of
the Misty Mountains. Out of the forest the Entwash ﬂowed to meet

430

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

them, its stream now swift and narrow, and its banks deep-cloven.
The orc-trail turned from the downs towards it.
Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then the
river back towards the forest, Aragorn saw a shadow on the distant
green, a dark swift-moving blur. He cast himself upon the ground
and listened again intently. But Legolas stood beside him, shading
his bright elven-eyes with his long slender hand, and he saw not a
shadow, nor a blur, but the small ﬁgures of horsemen, many horsemen, and the glint of morning on the tips of their spears was like the
twinkle of minute stars beyond the edge of mortal sight. Far behind
them a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads.
There was a silence in the empty ﬁelds, and Gimli could hear the
air moving in the grass.
‘Riders!’ cried Aragorn, springing to his feet. ‘Many riders on swift
steeds are coming towards us!’
‘Yes,’ said Legolas, ‘there are one hundred and ﬁve. Yellow is
their hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall.’
Aragorn smiled. ‘Keen are the eyes of the Elves,’ he said.
‘Nay! The riders are little more than ﬁve leagues distant,’ said
Legolas.
‘Five leagues or one,’ said Gimli, ‘we cannot escape them in this
bare land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?’
‘We will wait,’ said Aragorn. ‘I am weary, and our hunt has failed.
Or at least others were before us; for these horsemen are riding back
down the orc-trail. We may get news from them.’
‘Or spears,’ said Gimli.
‘There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,’ said Legolas.
‘I did not say that we should hear good news,’ said Aragorn. ‘But
evil or good we will await it here.’
The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might
be an easy mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down
the northward slope. A little above the hill’s foot they halted, and
wrapping their cloaks about them, they sat huddled together upon
the faded grass. The time passed slowly and heavily. The wind was
thin and searching. Gimli was uneasy.
‘What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?’ he said. ‘Do we
sit here waiting for sudden death?’
‘I have been among them,’ answered Aragorn. ‘They are proud
and wilful, but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed;
bold but not cruel; wise but unlearned, writing no books but singing
many songs, after the manner of the children of Men before the Dark
Years. But I do not know what has happened here of late, nor in
what mind the Rohirrim may now be between the traitor Saruman
and the threat of Sauron. They have long been the friends of the

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

431

people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was in forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them out of the
North, and their kinship is rather with the Bardings of Dale, and
with the Beornings of the Wood, among whom may still be seen
many men tall and fair, as are the Riders of Rohan. At least they will
not love the Orcs.’
‘But Gandalf spoke of a rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor,’
said Gimli.
‘I believe it no more than did Boromir,’ answered Aragorn.
‘You will soon learn the truth,’ said Legolas. ‘Already they
approach.’
At length even Gimli could hear the distant beat of galloping hoofs.
The horsemen, following the trail, had turned from the river, and
were drawing near the downs. They were riding like the wind.
Now the cries of clear strong voices came ringing over the ﬁelds.
Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and the foremost
horseman swerved, passing by the foot of the hill, and leading the
host back southward along the western skirts of the downs. After him
they rode: a long line of mail-clad men, swift, shining, fell and fair
to look upon.
Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their
grey coats glistened, their long tails ﬂowed in the wind, their manes
were braided on their proud necks. The Men that rode them matched
them well: tall and long-limbed; their hair, ﬂaxen-pale, ﬂowed under
their light helms, and streamed in long braids behind them; their
faces were stern and keen. In their hands were tall spears of ash,
painted shields were slung at their backs, long swords were at their
belts, their burnished shirts of mail hung down upon their knees.
In pairs they galloped by, and though every now and then one
rose in his stirrups and gazed ahead and to either side, they appeared
not to perceive the three strangers sitting silently and watching them.
The host had almost passed when suddenly Aragorn stood up, and
called in a loud voice:
‘What news from the North, Riders of Rohan?’
With astonishing speed and skill they checked their steeds,
wheeled, and came charging round. Soon the three companions
found themselves in a ring of horsemen moving in a running circle,
up the hill-slope behind them and down, round and round them,
and drawing ever inwards. Aragorn stood silent, and the other two
sat without moving, wondering what way things would turn.
Without a word or cry, suddenly, the Riders halted. A thicket of
spears were pointed towards the strangers; and some of the horsemen

432

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

had bows in hand, and their arrows were already ﬁtted to the string.
Then one rode forward, a tall man, taller than all the rest; from his
helm as a crest a white horsetail ﬂowed. He advanced until the point
of his spear was within a foot of Aragorn’s breast. Aragorn did not
stir.
‘Who are you, and what are you doing in this land?’ said the Rider,
using the Common Speech of the West, in manner and tone like to
the speech of Boromir, Man of Gondor.
‘I am called Strider,’ answered Aragorn. ‘I came out of the North.
I am hunting Orcs.’
The Rider leaped from his horse. Giving his spear to another who
rode up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood
face to face with Aragorn, surveying him keenly, and not without
wonder. At length he spoke again.
‘At ﬁrst I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,’ he said; ‘but
now I see that it is not so. Indeed you know little of Orcs, if you go
hunting them in this fashion. They were swift and well-armed, and
they were many. You would have changed from hunters to prey, if
ever you had overtaken them. But there is something strange about
you, Strider.’ He bent his clear bright eyes again upon the Ranger.
‘That is no name for a Man that you give. And strange too is your
raiment. Have you sprung out of the grass? How did you escape our
sight? Are you Elvish folk?’
‘No,’ said Aragorn. ‘One only of us is an Elf, Legolas from the
Woodland Realm in distant Mirkwood. But we have passed through
Lothlórien, and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us.’
The Rider looked at them with renewed wonder, but his eyes
hardened. ‘Then there is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales
tell!’ he said. ‘Few escape her nets, they say. These are strange days!
But if you have her favour, then you also are net-weavers and
sorcerers, maybe.’ He turned a cold glance suddenly upon Legolas
and Gimli. ‘Why do you not speak, silent ones?’ he demanded.
Gimli rose and planted his feet ﬁrmly apart: his hand gripped the
handle of his axe, and his dark eyes ﬂashed. ‘Give me your name,
horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,’ he said.
‘As for that,’ said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, ‘the
´
stranger should declare himself ﬁrst. Yet I am named Eomer
son of
´
Eomund, and am called the Third Marshal of Riddermark.’
´
´
‘Then Eomer
son of Eomund,
Third Marshal of Riddermark, let
Gimli the Dwarf Glóin’s son warn you against foolish words. You
speak evil of that which is fair beyond the reach of your thought, and
only little wit can excuse you.’
Éomer’s eyes blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily,
and closed in, advancing their spears. ‘I would cut off your head,

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

433

beard and all, Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the
´
ground,’ said Eomer.
‘He stands not alone,’ said Legolas, bending his bow and ﬁtting
an arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. ‘You would die
before your stroke fell.’
´
Eomer
raised his sword, and things might have gone ill, but
Aragorn sprang between them, and raised his hand. ‘Your pardon,
Éomer!’ he cried. ‘When you know more you will understand why
you have angered my companions. We intend no evil to Rohan, nor
to any of its folk, neither to man nor to horse. Will you not hear our
tale before you strike?’
´
‘I will,’ said Eomer
lowering his blade. ‘But wanderers in the
Riddermark would be wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt.
First tell me your right name.’
‘First tell me whom you serve,’ said Aragorn. ‘Are you friend or
foe of Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?’
‘I serve only the Lord of the Mark, Théoden King son of Thengel,’
´
answered Eomer.
‘We do not serve the Power of the Black Land far
away, but neither are we yet at open war with him; and if you are
ﬂeeing from him, then you had best leave this land. There is trouble
now on all our borders, and we are threatened; but we desire only
to be free, and to live as we have lived, keeping our own, and serving
no foreign lord, good or evil. We welcomed guests kindly in the better
days, but in these times the unbidden stranger ﬁnds us swift and
hard. Come! Who are you? Whom do you serve? At whose command
do you hunt Orcs in our land?’
‘I serve no man,’ said Aragorn; ‘but the servants of Sauron I pursue
into whatever land they may go. There are few among mortal Men
who know more of Orcs; and I do not hunt them in this fashion out
of choice. The Orcs whom we pursued took captive two of my friends.
In such need a man that has no horse will go on foot, and he will
not ask for leave to follow the trail. Nor will he count the heads of
the enemy save with a sword. I am not weaponless.’
Aragorn threw back his cloak. The elven-sheath glittered as he
grasped it, and the bright blade of Andúril shone like a sudden
ﬂame as he swept it out. ‘Elendil!’ he cried. ‘I am Aragorn son of
Arathorn, and am called Elessar, the Elfstone, Dúnadan, the heir
of Isildur Elendil’s son of Gondor. Here is the Sword that was
Broken and is forged again! Will you aid me or thwart me? Choose
swiftly!’
Gimli and Legolas looked at their companion in amazement, for
they had not seen him in this mood before. He seemed to have grown
´
in stature while Eomer
had shrunk; and in his living face they caught
a brief vision of the power and majesty of the kings of stone. For a

434

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

moment it seemed to the eyes of Legolas that a white ﬂame ﬂickered
on the brows of Aragorn like a shining crown.
´
Eomer
stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He cast
down his proud eyes. ‘These are indeed strange days,’ he muttered.
‘Dreams and legends spring to life out of the grass.
‘Tell me, lord,’ he said, ‘what brings you here? And what was the
meaning of the dark words? Long has Boromir son of Denethor been
gone seeking an answer, and the horse that we lent him came back
riderless. What doom do you bring out of the North?’
‘The doom of choice,’ said Aragorn. ‘You may say this to Théoden
son of Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against
him. None may live now as they have lived, and few shall keep what
they call their own. But of these great matters we will speak later. If
chance allows, I will come myself to the king. Now I am in great
need, and I ask for help, or at least for tidings. You heard that we
are pursuing an orc-host that carried off our friends. What can you
tell us?’
´
‘That you need not pursue them further,’ said Eomer.
‘The Orcs
are destroyed.’
‘And our friends?’
‘We found none but Orcs.’
‘But that is strange indeed,’ said Aragorn. ‘Did you search the
slain? Were there no bodies other than those of orc-kind? They would
be small, only children to your eyes, unshod but clad in grey.’
´
‘There were no dwarves nor children,’ said Eomer.
‘We counted
all the slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and
burned them, as is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.’
‘We do not speak of dwarves or children,’ said Gimli. ‘Our friends
were hobbits.’
´
‘Hobbits?’ said Eomer.
‘And what may they be? It is a strange
name.’
‘A strange name for a strange folk,’ said Gimli. ‘But these were
very dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words
that troubled Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halﬂing. These hobbits
are Halﬂings.’
´
‘Halﬂings!’ laughed the Rider that stood beside Eomer.
‘Halﬂings!
But they are only a little people in old songs and children’s tales out
of the North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the
daylight?’
‘A man may do both,’ said Aragorn. ‘For not we but those who
come after will make the legends of our time. The green earth, say
you? That is a mighty matter of legend, though you tread it under
the light of day!’
‘Time is pressing,’ said the Rider, not heeding Aragorn. ‘We must

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

435

hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Or
let us bind them and take them to the king.’
´
´
‘Peace, Eothain!’
said Eomer
in his own tongue. ‘Leave me a while.
Tell the éored to assemble on the path, and make ready to ride to the
Entwade.’
´
Muttering Eothain
retired, and spoke to the others. Soon they
´
drew off and left Eomer
alone with the three companions.
‘All that you say is strange, Aragorn,’ he said. ‘Yet you speak the
truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefore
they are not easily deceived. But you have not told all. Will you not
now speak more fully of your errand, so that I may judge what to
do?’
‘I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks
ago,’ answered Aragorn. ‘With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith.
My errand was to go to that city with the son of Denethor, to aid
his folk in their war against Sauron. But the Company that I journeyed
with had other business. Of that I cannot speak now. Gandalf the
Grey was our leader.’
´
‘Gandalf !’ Eomer
exclaimed. ‘Gandalf Greyhame is known in the
Mark; but his name, I warn you, is no longer a password to the king’s
favour. He has been a guest in the land many times in the memory
of men, coming as he will, after a season, or after many years. He is
ever the herald of strange events: a bringer of evil, some now say.
‘Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone
amiss. At that time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we
counted Saruman our friend, but Gandalf came then and warned us
that sudden war was preparing in Isengard. He said that he himself
had been a prisoner in Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and he
begged for help. But Théoden would not listen to him, and he went
away. Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in Théoden’s ears! He
is wroth. For Gandalf took the horse that is called Shadowfax, the
most precious of all the king’s steeds, chief of the Mearas, which only
the Lord of the Mark may ride. For the sire of their race was the
great horse of Eorl that knew the speech of Men. Seven nights ago
Shadowfax returned; but the king’s anger is not less, for now the
horse is wild and will let no man handle him.’
‘Then Shadowfax has found his way alone from the far North,’
said Aragorn; ‘for it was there that he and Gandalf parted. But alas!
Gandalf will ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines of
Moria and comes not again.’
´
‘That is heavy tidings,’ said Eomer.
‘At least to me, and to many;
though not to all, as you may ﬁnd, if you come to the king.’
‘It is tidings more grievous than any in this land can understand,

436

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

though it may touch them sorely ere the year is much older,’ said
Aragorn. ‘But when the great fall, the less must lead. My part it has
been to guide our Company on the long road from Moria. Through
Lórien we came – of which it were well that you should learn the
truth ere you speak of it again – and thence down the leagues of
the Great River to the falls of Rauros. There Boromir was slain by
the same Orcs whom you destroyed.’
´
‘Your news is all of woe!’ cried Eomer
in dismay. ‘Great harm is
this death to Minas Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man!
All spoke his praise. He came seldom to the Mark, for he was ever
in the wars on the East-borders; but I have seen him. More like to
the swift sons of Eorl than to the grave Men of Gondor he seemed
to me, and likely to prove a great captain of his people when his time
came. But we have had no word of this grief out of Gondor. When
did he fall?’
‘It is now the fourth day since he was slain,’ answered Aragorn;
‘and since the evening of that day we have journeyed from the shadow
of Tol Brandir.’
´
‘On foot?’ cried Eomer.
‘Yes, even as you see us.’
´
Wide wonder came into Eomer’s
eyes. ‘Strider is too poor a name,
son of Arathorn,’ he said. ‘Wingfoot I name you. This deed of the
three friends should be sung in many a hall. Forty leagues and ﬁve
you have measured ere the fourth day is ended! Hardy is the race of
Elendil!
‘But now, lord, what would you have me do! I must return in
haste to Théoden. I spoke warily before my men. It is true that we
are not yet at open war with the Black Land, and there are some,
close to the king’s ear, that speak craven counsels; but war is coming.
We shall not forsake our old alliance with Gondor, and while they
ﬁght we shall aid them: so say I and all who hold with me. The
East-mark is my charge, the ward of the Third Marshal, and I have
removed all our herds and herdfolk, withdrawing them beyond
Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.’
‘Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?’ said Gimli.
´
‘We do not and we never have,’ said Eomer
with a ﬂash of his
eyes; ‘though it comes to my ears that that lie has been told. Some
years ago the Lord of the Black Land wished to purchase horses of
us at great price, but we refused him, for he puts beasts to evil use.
Then he sent plundering Orcs, and they carry off what they can,
choosing always the black horses: few of these are now left. For that
reason our feud with the Orcs is bitter.
‘But at this time our chief concern is with Saruman. He has claimed
lordship over all this land, and there has been war between us for

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

437

many months. He has taken Orcs into his service, and Wolf-riders,
and evil Men, and he has closed the Gap against us, so that we are
likely to be beset both east and west.
‘It is ill dealing with such a foe: he is a wizard both cunning and
dwimmer-crafty, having many guises. He walks here and there, they
say, as an old man hooded and cloaked, very like to Gandalf, as many
now recall. His spies slip through every net, and his birds of ill omen
are abroad in the sky. I do not know how it will all end, and my
heart misgives me; for it seems to me that his friends do not all dwell
in Isengard. But if you come to the king’s house, you shall see for
yourself. Will you not come? Do I hope in vain that you have been
sent to me for a help in doubt and need?’
‘I will come when I may,’ said Aragorn.
´
‘Come now!’ said Eomer.
‘The Heir of Elendil would be a strength
indeed to the Sons of Eorl in this evil tide. There is battle even now
upon the Westemnet, and I fear that it may go ill for us.
‘Indeed in this riding north I went without the king’s leave, for in
my absence his house is left with little guard. But scouts warned me
of the orc-host coming down out of the East Wall four nights ago,
and among them they reported that some bore the white badges of
Saruman. So suspecting what I most fear, a league between Orthanc
and the Dark Tower, I led forth my éored, men of my own household;
and we overtook the Orcs at nightfall two days ago, near to the
borders of the Entwood. There we surrounded them, and gave battle
yesterday at dawn. Fifteen of my men I lost, and twelve horses alas!
For the Orcs were greater in number than we counted on. Others
joined them, coming out of the East across the Great River: their
trail is plain to see a little north of this spot. And others, too, came
out of the forest. Great Orcs, who also bore the White Hand of
Isengard: that kind is stronger and more fell than all others.
‘Nonetheless we put an end to them. But we have been too long
away. We are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are
spare horses as you see. There is work for the Sword to do. Yes, and
we could ﬁnd a use for Gimli’s axe and the bow of Legolas, if they
will pardon my rash words concerning the Lady of the Wood. I spoke
only as do all men in my land, and I would gladly learn better.’
‘I thank you for your fair words,’ said Aragorn, ‘and my heart
desires to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope
remains.’
´
‘Hope does not remain,’ said Eomer.
‘You will not ﬁnd your
friends on the North-borders.’
‘Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far
from the East Wall that one at least of them was still alive there. But
between the wall and the downs we have found no other trace of

438

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

them, and no trail has turned aside, this way or that, unless my skill
has wholly left me.’
‘Then what do you think has become of them?’
‘I do not know. They may have been slain and burned among the
Orcs; but that you will say cannot be, and I do not fear it. I can only
think that they were carried off into the forest before the battle, even
before you encircled your foes, maybe. Can you swear that none
escaped your net in such a way?’
‘I would swear that no Orc escaped after we sighted them,’ said
´
Eomer.
‘We reached the forest-eaves before them, and if after that
any living thing broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had
some Elvish power.’
‘Our friends were attired even as we are,’ said Aragorn; ‘and you
passed us by under the full light of day.’
´
‘I had forgotten that,’ said Eomer.
‘It is hard to be sure of anything
among so many marvels. The world is all grown strange. Elf and
Dwarf in company walk in our daily ﬁelds; and folk speak with the
Lady of the Wood and yet live; and the Sword comes back to war
that was broken in the long ages ere the fathers of our fathers rode
into the Mark! How shall a man judge what to do in such times?’
‘As he ever has judged,’ said Aragorn. ‘Good and ill have not
changed since yesteryear; nor are they one thing among Elves and
Dwarves and another among Men. It is a man’s part to discern them,
as much in the Golden Wood as in his own house.’
´
‘True indeed,’ said Eomer.
‘But I do not doubt you, nor the deed
which my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It
is against our law to let strangers wander at will in our land, until
the king himself shall give them leave, and more strict is the command
in these days of peril. I have begged you to come back willingly with
me, and you will not. Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred
against three.’
‘I do not think your law was made for such a chance,’ said Aragorn.
‘Nor indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this land before, more
than once, and ridden with the host of the Rohirrim, though under
other name and in other guise. You I have not seen before, for you
´
are young, but I have spoken with Eomund
your father, and with
Théoden son of Thengel. Never in former days would any high lord
of this land have constrained a man to abandon such a quest as mine.
´
My duty at least is clear, to go on. Come now, son of Eomund,
the
choice must be made at last. Aid us, or at the worst let us go free.
Or seek to carry out your law. If you do so there will be fewer to
return to your war or to your king.’
Éomer was silent for a moment, then he spoke. ‘We both have
need of haste,’ he said. ‘My company chafes to be away, and every

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

439

hour lessens your hope. This is my choice. You may go; and what
is more, I will lend you horses. This only I ask: when your quest is
achieved, or is proved vain, return with the horses over the Entwade
to Meduseld, the high house in Edoras where Théoden now sits.
Thus you shall prove to him that I have not misjudged. In this I
place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of your good
faith. Do not fail.’
‘I will not,’ said Aragorn.
There was great wonder, and many dark and doubtful glances,
´
among his men, when Eomer
gave orders that the spare horses were
´
to be lent to the strangers; but only Eothain
dared to speak openly.
‘It may be well enough for this lord of the race of Gondor, as he
claims,’ he said, ‘but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being
given to a Dwarf ?’
‘No one,’ said Gimli. ‘And do not trouble: no one will ever hear
of it. I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any beast so great,
free or begrudged.’
‘But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,’ said Aragorn.
‘Come, you shall sit behind me, friend Gimli,’ said Legolas. ‘Then
all will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled
by one.’
A great dark-grey horse was brought to Aragorn, and he mounted
´
it. ‘Hasufel is his name,’ said Eomer.
‘May he bear you well and to
better fortune than Gárulf, his late master!’
A smaller and lighter horse, but restive and ﬁery, was brought to
Legolas. Arod was his name. But Legolas asked them to take off
saddle and rein. ‘I need them not,’ he said, and leaped lightly up,
and to their wonder Arod was tame and willing beneath him, moving
here and there with but a spoken word: such was the Elvish way with
all good beasts. Gimli was lifted up behind his friend, and he clung
to him, not much more at ease than Sam Gamgee in a boat.
´
‘Farewell, and may you ﬁnd what you seek!’ cried Eomer.
‘Return
with what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine
together!’
‘I will come,’ said Aragorn.
‘And I will come, too,’ said Gimli. ‘The matter of the Lady Galadriel
lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech.’
´
‘We shall see,’ said Eomer.
‘So many strange things have chanced
that to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a
Dwarf ’s axe will seem no great wonder. Farewell!’
With that they parted. Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When
´
after a little Gimli looked back, the company of Eomer
were already

440

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

small and far away. Aragorn did not look back: he was watching the
trail as they sped on their way, bending low with his head beside the
neck of Hasufel. Before long they came to the borders of the Entwash,
´
and there they met the other trail of which Eomer
had spoken, coming
down from the East out of the Wold.
Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then leaping back
into the saddle, he rode away for some distance eastward, keeping
to one side and taking care not to override the footprints. Then he
again dismounted and examined the ground, going backwards and
forwards on foot.
‘There is little to discover,’ he said when he returned. ‘The main
trail is all confused with the passage of the horsemen as they came
back; their outward course must have lain nearer the river. But this
eastward trail is fresh and clear. There is no sign there of any feet
going the other way, back towards Anduin. Now we must ride slower,
and make sure that no trace or footstep branches off on either side.
The Orcs must have been aware from this point that they were pursued; they may have made some attempt to get their captives away
before they were overtaken.’
As they rode forward the day was overcast. Low grey clouds came
over the Wold. A mist shrouded the sun. Ever nearer the tree-clad
slopes of Fangorn loomed, slowly darkling as the sun went west.
They saw no sign of any trail to right or left, but here and there they
passed single Orcs, fallen in their tracks as they ran, with greyfeathered arrows sticking in back or throat.
At last as the afternoon was waning they came to the eaves of the
forest, and in an open glade among the ﬁrst trees they found the
place of the great burning: the ashes were still hot and smoking.
Beside it was a great pile of helms and mail, cloven shields, and
broken swords, bows and darts and other gear of war. Upon a stake
in the middle was set a great goblin head; upon its shattered helm
the white badge could still be seen. Further away, not far from the
river, where it came streaming out from the edge of the wood, there
was a mound. It was newly raised: the raw earth was covered with
fresh-cut turves: about it were planted ﬁfteen spears.
Aragorn and his companions searched far and wide about the
ﬁeld of battle, but the light faded, and evening soon drew down, dim
and misty. By nightfall they had discovered no trace of Merry and
Pippin.
‘We can do no more,’ said Gimli sadly. ‘We have been set many
riddles since we came to Tol Brandir, but this is the hardest to
unravel. I would guess that the burned bones of the hobbits are now
mingled with the Orcs’. It will be hard news for Frodo, if he lives to

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

441

hear it; and hard too for the old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond
was against their coming.’
‘But Gandalf was not,’ said Legolas.
‘But Gandalf chose to come himself, and he was the ﬁrst to be
lost,’ answered Gimli. ‘His foresight failed him.’
‘The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of
safety, for himself or for others,’ said Aragorn. ‘There are some things
that it is better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be
dark. But I shall not depart from this place yet. In any case we must
here await the morning-light.’
A little way beyond the battle-ﬁeld they made their camp under
a spreading tree: it looked like a chestnut, and yet it still bore many
broad brown leaves of a former year, like dry hands with long splayed
ﬁngers; they rattled mournfully in the night-breeze.
Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. ‘Let
us light a ﬁre,’ he said. ‘I care no longer for the danger. Let the Orcs
come as thick as summer-moths round a candle!’
‘If those unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it might draw
them hither,’ said Legolas.
‘And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,’ said
Aragorn. ‘We are near to the mountain-marches of the traitor
Saruman. Also we are on the very edge of Fangorn, and it is perilous
to touch the trees of that wood, it is said.’
‘But the Rohirrim made a great burning here yesterday,’ said
Gimli, ‘and they felled trees for the ﬁre, as can be seen. Yet they
passed the night after safely here, when their labour was ended.’
‘They were many,’ said Aragorn, ‘and they do not heed the wrath
of Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under
the trees. But our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself.
So have a care! Cut no living wood!’
‘There is no need,’ said Gimli. ‘The Riders have left chip and
bough enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.’ He went off
to gather fuel, and busied himself with building and kindling a ﬁre;
but Aragorn sat silent with his back to the great tree, deep in thought;
and Legolas stood alone in the open, looking towards the profound
shadow of the wood, leaning forward, as one who listens to voices
calling from a distance.
When the Dwarf had a small bright blaze going, the three companions drew close to it and sat together, shrouding the light with
their hooded forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree
reaching out above them.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘The tree is glad of the ﬁre!’
It may have been that the dancing shadows tricked their eyes, but

442

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

certainly to each of the companions the boughs appeared to be bending this way and that so as to come above the ﬂames, while the upper
branches were stooping down; the brown leaves now stood out stiff,
and rubbed together like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in
the warmth.
There was a silence, for suddenly the dark and unknown forest,
so near at hand, made itself felt as a great brooding presence, full of
secret purpose. After a while Legolas spoke again.
‘Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,’ he said. ‘Do you
know why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir
had heard?’
‘I have heard many tales in Gondor and elsewhere,’ said Aragorn,
‘but if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them
only fables that Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had
thought of asking you what was the truth of the matter. And if an
Elf of the wood does not know, how shall a Man answer?’
‘You have journeyed further than I,’ said Legolas. ‘I have heard
nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that tell how the
Onodrim, that Men call Ents, dwelt there long ago; for Fangorn is
old, old even as the Elves would reckon it.’
‘Yes, it is old,’ said Aragorn, ‘as old as the forest by the Barrowdowns, and it is far greater. Elrond says that the two are akin, the
last strongholds of the mighty woods of the Elder Days, in which the
Firstborn roamed while Men still slept. Yet Fangorn holds some
secret of its own. What it is I do not know.’
‘And I do not wish to know,’ said Gimli. ‘Let nothing that dwells
in Fangorn be troubled on my account!’
They now drew lots for the watches, and the lot for the ﬁrst watch
fell to Gimli. The others lay down. Almost at once sleep laid hold
on them. ‘Gimli!’ said Aragorn drowsily. ‘Remember, it is perilous
to cut bough or twig from a living tree in Fangorn. But do not stray
far in search of dead wood. Let the ﬁre die rather! Call me at need!’
With that he fell asleep. Legolas already lay motionless, his fair
hands folded upon his breast, his eyes unclosed, blending living night
and deep dream, as is the way with Elves. Gimli sat hunched by the
ﬁre, running his thumb thoughtfully along the edge of his axe. The
tree rustled. There was no other sound.
Suddenly Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of the
ﬁrelight stood an old bent man, leaning on a staff, and wrapped in
a great cloak; his wide-brimmed hat was pulled down over his eyes.
Gimli sprang up, too amazed for the moment to cry out, though at
once the thought ﬂashed into his mind that Saruman had caught
them. Both Aragorn and Legolas, roused by his sudden movement,
sat up and stared. The old man did not speak or make a sign.

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

443

‘Well, father, what can we do for you?’ said Aragorn, leaping to
his feet. ‘Come and be warm, if you are cold!’ He strode forward,
but the old man was gone. There was no trace of him to be found
near at hand, and they did not dare to wander far. The moon had
set and the night was very dark.
Suddenly Legolas gave a cry. ‘The horses! The horses!’
The horses were gone. They had dragged their pickets and disappeared. For some time the three companions stood still and silent,
troubled by this new stroke of ill fortune. They were under the eaves
of Fangorn, and endless leagues lay between them and the Men of
Rohan, their only friends in this wide and dangerous land. As they
stood, it seemed to them that they heard, far off in the night, the
sound of horses whinnying and neighing. Then all was quiet again,
except for the cold rustle of the wind.
‘Well, they are gone,’ said Aragorn at last. ‘We cannot ﬁnd them
or catch them; so that if they do not return of their own will, we
must do without. We started on our feet, and we have those still.’
‘Feet!’ said Gimli. ‘But we cannot eat them as well as walk on
them.’ He threw some fuel on the ﬁre and slumped down beside it.
‘Only a few hours ago you were unwilling to sit on a horse of
Rohan,’ laughed Legolas. ‘You will make a rider yet.’
‘It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,’ said Gimli.
‘If you wish to know what I think,’ he began again after a while,
´
‘I think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember the words of Eomer:
he walks about like an old man hooded and cloaked. Those were the
words. He has gone off with our horses, or scared them away, and
here we are. There is more trouble coming to us, mark my words!’
‘I mark them,’ said Aragorn. ‘But I marked also that this old man
had a hat not a hood. Still I do not doubt that you guess right, and
that we are in peril here, by night or day. Yet in the meantime there
is nothing that we can do but rest, while we may. I will watch for a
while now, Gimli. I have more need of thought than of sleep.’
The night passed slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and Gimli
followed Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing happened. The old man did not appear again, and the horses did not
return.

Chapter 5
THE WHITE RIDER
‘My very bones are chilled,’ said Gimli, ﬂapping his arms and stamping his feet. Day had come at last. At dawn the companions had
made such breakfast as they could; now in the growing light they
were getting ready to search the ground again for signs of the hobbits.
‘And do not forget that old man!’ said Gimli. ‘I should be happier
if I could see the print of a boot.’
‘Why would that make you happy?’ said Legolas.
‘Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more
than he seemed,’ answered the Dwarf.
‘Maybe,’ said the Elf; ‘but a heavy boot might leave no print here:
the grass is deep and springy.’
‘That would not bafﬂe a Ranger,’ said Gimli. ‘A bent blade is
enough for Aragorn to read. But I do not expect him to ﬁnd any
traces. It was an evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night. I
am sure of it, even under the light of morning. His eyes are looking
out on us from Fangorn even now, maybe.’
‘It is likely enough,’ said Aragorn; ‘yet I am not sure. I am thinking
of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scared away.
But I did not think so. Did you hear them, Legolas? Did they sound
to you like beasts in terror?’
‘No,’ said Legolas. ‘I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and
our own fear I should have guessed that they were beasts wild with
some sudden gladness. They spoke as horses will when they meet a
friend that they have long missed.’
‘So I thought,’ said Aragorn; ‘but I cannot read the riddle, unless
they return. Come! The light is growing fast. Let us look ﬁrst and
guess later! We should begin here, near to our own camping-ground,
searching carefully all about, and working up the slope towards the
forest. To ﬁnd the hobbits is our errand, whatever we may think of
our visitor in the night. If they escaped by some chance, then they
must have hidden in the trees, or they would have been seen. If we
ﬁnd nothing between here and the eaves of the wood, then we will
make a last search upon the battle-ﬁeld and among the ashes. But
there is little hope there: the horsemen of Rohan did their work too
well.’
For some time the companions crawled and groped upon the
ground. The tree stood mournfully above them, its dry leaves now

THE WHITE RIDER

489

hanging limp, and rattling in the chill easterly wind. Aragorn moved
slowly away. He came to the ashes of the watch-ﬁre near the riverbank, and then began to retrace the ground back towards the knoll
where the battle had been fought. Suddenly he stooped and bent low
with his face almost in the grass. Then he called to the others. They
came running up.
‘Here at last we ﬁnd news!’ said Aragorn. He lifted up a broken
leaf for them to see, a large pale leaf of golden hue, now fading and
turning brown. ‘Here is a mallorn-leaf of Lórien, and there are small
crumbs on it, and a few more crumbs in the grass. And see! there
are some pieces of cut cord lying nearby!’
‘And here is the knife that cut them!’ said Gimli. He stooped and
drew out of a tussock, into which some heavy foot had trampled it,
a short jagged blade. The haft from which it had been snapped was
beside it. ‘It was an orc-weapon,’ he said, holding it gingerly, and
looking with disgust at the carved handle: it had been shaped like a
hideous head with squinting eyes and leering mouth.
‘Well, here is the strangest riddle that we have yet found!’
exclaimed Legolas. ‘A bound prisoner escapes both from the Orcs
and from the surrounding horsemen. He then stops, while still in the
open, and cuts his bonds with an orc-knife. But how and why? For
if his legs were tied, how did he walk? And if his arms were tied, how
did he use the knife? And if neither were tied, why did he cut the
cords at all? Being pleased with his skill, he then sat down and quietly
ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show that he was a
hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that, I suppose, he turned his
arms into wings and ﬂew away singing into the trees. It should be
easy to ﬁnd him: we only need wings ourselves!’
‘There was sorcery here right enough,’ said Gimli. ‘What was that
old man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of
Legolas. Can you better it?’
‘Maybe, I could,’ said Aragorn, smiling. ‘There are some other
signs near at hand that you have not considered. I agree that the
prisoner was a hobbit and must have had either legs or hands free,
before he came here. I guess that it was hands, because the riddle
then becomes easier, and also because, as I read the marks, he was
carried to this point by an Orc. Blood was spilled there, a few paces
away, orc-blood. There are deep prints of hoofs all about this spot,
and signs that a heavy thing was dragged away. The Orc was slain
by horsemen, and later his body was hauled to the ﬁre. But the hobbit
was not seen: he was not ‘‘in the open’’, for it was night and he still
had his elven-cloak. He was exhausted and hungry, and it is not to
be wondered at that, when he had cut his bonds with the knife of
his fallen enemy, he rested and ate a little before he crept away. But

490

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

it is a comfort to know that he had some lembas in his pocket, even
though he ran away without gear or pack; that, perhaps, is like a
hobbit. I say he, though I hope and guess that both Merry and Pippin
were here together. There is, however, nothing to show that for
certain.’
‘And how do you suppose that either of our friends came to have
a hand free?’ asked Gimli.
‘I do not know how it happened,’ answered Aragorn. ‘Nor do I
know why an Orc was carrying them away. Not to help them to
escape, we may be sure. Nay, rather I think that I now begin to
understand a matter that has puzzled me from the beginning: why
when Boromir had fallen were the Orcs content with the capture of
Merry and Pippin? They did not seek out the rest of us, nor attack
our camp; but instead they went with all speed towards Isengard.
Did they suppose they had captured the Ring-bearer and his faithful
comrade? I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such
plain orders to Orcs, even if they knew so much themselves; they
would not speak openly to them of the Ring: they are not trusty
servants. But I think the Orcs had been commanded to capture hobbits, alive, at all costs. An attempt was made to slip out with the
precious prisoners before the battle. Treachery perhaps, likely enough
with such folk; some large and bold Orc may have been trying to
escape with the prize alone, for his own ends. There, that is my tale.
Others might be devised. But on this we may count in any case: one
at least of our friends escaped. It is our task to ﬁnd him and help
him before we return to Rohan. We must not be daunted by Fangorn,
since need drove him into that dark place.’
‘I do not know which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought
of the long road through Rohan on foot,’ said Gimli.
‘Then let us go to the forest,’ said Aragorn.
It was not long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point,
near the bank of the Entwash, he came upon footprints: hobbit-prints,
but too light for much to be made of them. Then again beneath
the bole of a great tree on the very edge of the wood more prints
were discovered. The earth was bare and dry, and did not reveal
much.
‘One hobbit at least stood here for a while and looked back; and
then he turned away into the forest,’ said Aragorn.
‘Then we must go in, too,’ said Gimli. ‘But I do not like the look
of this Fangorn; and we were warned against it. I wish the chase had
led anywhere else!’
‘I do not think the wood feels evil, whatever tales may say,’ said
Legolas. He stood under the eaves of the forest, stooping forward,

THE WHITE RIDER

491

as if he were listening, and peering with wide eyes into the shadows.
‘No, it is not evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the
faintest echoes of dark places where the hearts of the trees are black.
There is no malice near us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.’
‘Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,’ said Gimli. ‘I have
done it no harm.’
‘That is just as well,’ said Legolas. ‘But nonetheless it has suffered
harm. There is something happening inside, or going to happen. Do
you not feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.’
‘I feel the air is stuffy,’ said the Dwarf. ‘This wood is lighter than
Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.’
‘It is old, very old,’ said the Elf. ‘So old that almost I feel young
again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. It is old
and full of memory. I could have been happy here, if I had come in
days of peace.’
‘I dare say you could,’ snorted Gimli. ‘You are a Wood-elf, anyway,
though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Where
you go, I will go. But keep your bow ready to hand, and I will keep
my axe loose in my belt. Not for use on trees,’ he added hastily,
looking up at the tree under which they stood. ‘I do not wish to meet
that old man at unawares without an argument ready to hand, that
is all. Let us go!’
With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn.
Legolas and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little for
him to see. The ﬂoor of the forest was dry and covered with a drift
of leaves; but guessing that the fugitives would stay near the water,
he returned often to the banks of the stream. So it was that he came
upon the place where Merry and Pippin had drunk and bathed their
feet. There plain for all to see were the footprints of two hobbits,
one somewhat smaller than the other.
‘This is good tidings,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet the marks are two days
old. And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the waterside.’
‘Then what shall we do now?’ said Gimli. ‘We cannot pursue them
through the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied.
If we do not ﬁnd them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except
to sit down beside them and show our friendship by starving together.’
‘If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,’ said Aragorn.
‘Let us go on.’
They came at length to the steep abrupt end of Treebeard’s Hill,
and looked up at the rock-wall with its rough steps leading to the
high shelf. Gleams of sun were striking through the hurrying clouds,
and the forest now looked less grey and drear.

492

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Let us go up and look about us!’ said Legolas. ‘I still feel my
breath short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.’
The companions climbed up. Aragorn came last, moving slowly:
he was scanning the steps and ledges closely.
‘I am almost sure that the hobbits have been up here,’ he said.
‘But there are other marks, very strange marks, which I do not understand. I wonder if we can see anything from this ledge which will
help us to guess which way they went next?’
He stood up and looked about, but he saw nothing that was of
any use. The shelf faced southward and eastward; but only on the
east was the view open. There he could see the heads of the trees
descending in ranks towards the plain from which they had come.
‘We have journeyed a long way round,’ said Legolas. ‘We could
have all come here safe together, if we had left the Great River on
the second or third day and struck west. Few can foresee whither
their road will lead them, till they come to its end.’
‘But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,’ said Gimli.
‘Yet here we are – and nicely caught in the net,’ said Legolas.
‘Look!’
‘Look at what?’ said Gimli.
‘There in the trees.’
‘Where? I have not elf-eyes.’
‘Hush! Speak more softly! Look!’ said Legolas pointing. ‘Down in
the wood, back in the way that we have just come. It is he. Cannot
you see him, passing from tree to tree?’
‘I see, I see now!’ hissed Gimli. ‘Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn
you? There is the old man. All in dirty grey rags: that is why I could
not see him at ﬁrst.’
Aragorn looked and beheld a bent ﬁgure moving slowly. It was
not far away. It looked like an old beggar-man, walking wearily,
leaning on a rough staff. His head was bowed, and he did not look
towards them. In other lands they would have greeted him with kind
words; but now they stood silent, each feeling a strange expectancy:
something was approaching that held a hidden power – or menace.
Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the ﬁgure
drew nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he
burst out: ‘Your bow, Legolas! Bend it! Get ready! It is Saruman.
Do not let him speak, or put a spell upon us! Shoot ﬁrst!’
Legolas took his bow and bent it, slowly and as if some other will
resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not ﬁt it
to the string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent.
‘Why are you waiting? What is the matter with you?’ said Gimli
in a hissing whisper.
‘Legolas is right,’ said Aragorn quietly. ‘We may not shoot an old

THE WHITE RIDER

493

man so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be
on us. Watch and wait!’
At that moment the old man quickened his pace and came with
surprising speed to the foot of the rock-wall. Then suddenly he looked
up, while they stood motionless looking down. There was no sound.
They could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he
wore a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his features were overshadowed,
except for the end of his nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed to
Aragorn that he caught the gleam of eyes keen and bright from within
the shadow of the hooded brows.
At last the old man broke the silence. ‘Well met indeed, my
friends,’ he said in a soft voice. ‘I wish to speak to you. Will you
come down, or shall I come up?’ Without waiting for an answer he
began to climb.
‘Now!’ cried Gimli. ‘Stop him, Legolas!’
‘Did I not say that I wished to speak to you?’ said the old man.
‘Put away that bow, Master Elf !’
The bow and arrow fell from Legolas’ hands, and his arms hung
loose at his sides.
‘And you, Master Dwarf, pray take your hand from your axe-haft,
till I am up! You will not need such arguments.’
Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old
man sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a goat. All weariness
seemed to have left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was
a gleam, too brief for certainty, a quick glint of white, as if some
garment shrouded by the grey rags had been for an instant revealed.
The intake of Gimli’s breath could be heard as a loud hiss in the
silence.
‘Well met, I say again!’ said the old man, coming towards them.
When he was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with
his head thrust forward, peering at them from under his hood. ‘And
what may you be doing in these parts? An Elf, a Man, and a Dwarf,
all clad in Elvish fashion. No doubt there is a tale worth hearing
behind it all. Such things are not often seen here.’
‘You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,’ said Aragorn. ‘Is that
so?’
‘Not well,’ said the old man: ‘that would be the study of many
lives. But I come here now and again.’
‘Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have
to say to us?’ said Aragorn. ‘The morning passes, and we have an
errand that will not wait.’
‘As for what I wished to say, I have said it: What may you be

494

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

doing, and what tale can you tell of yourselves? As for my name!’ He
broke off, laughing long and softly. Aragorn felt a shudder run
through him at the sound, a strange cold thrill; and yet it was not
fear or terror that he felt: rather it was like the sudden bite of a keen
air, or the slap of a cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper.
‘My name!’ said the old man again. ‘Have you not guessed it
already? You have heard it before, I think. Yes, you have heard it
before. But come now, what of your tale?’
The three companions stood silent and made no answer.
‘There are some who would begin to doubt whether your errand
is ﬁt to tell,’ said the old man. ‘Happily I know something of it. You
are tracking the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hobbits. Don’t stare, as if you had never heard the strange name before.
You have, and so have I. Well, they climbed up here the day before
yesterday; and they met someone that they did not expect. Does that
comfort you? And now you would like to know where they were
taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news about that. But
why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent
as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.’
The old man turned away and went towards a heap of fallen stones
and rock at the foot of the cliff behind. Immediately, as if a spell had
been removed, the others relaxed and stirred. Gimli’s hand went at
once to his axe-haft. Aragorn drew his sword. Legolas picked up his
bow.
The old man took no notice, but stooped and sat himself on a
low ﬂat stone. Then his grey cloak drew apart, and they saw, beyond
doubt, that he was clothed beneath all in white.
‘Saruman!’ cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand.
‘Speak! Tell us where you have hidden our friends! What have you
done with them? Speak, or I will make a dint in your hat that even
a wizard will ﬁnd it hard to deal with!’
The old man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and
leaped to the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly
tall, towering above them. His hood and his grey rags were ﬂung
away. His white garments shone. He lifted up his staff, and Gimli’s
axe leaped from his grasp and fell ringing on the ground. The sword
of Aragorn, stiff in his motionless hand, blazed with a sudden ﬁre.
Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high into the air: it
vanished in a ﬂash of ﬂame.
‘Mithrandir!’ he cried. ‘Mithrandir!’
‘Well met, I say to you again, Legolas!’ said the old man.
They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in the sunshine;
and gleaming white was his robe; the eyes under his deep brows were

THE WHITE RIDER

495

bright, piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between
wonder, joy, and fear they stood and found no words to say.
At last Aragorn stirred. ‘Gandalf !’ he said. ‘Beyond all hope you
return to us in our need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf !’
Gimli said nothing, but sank to his knees, shading his eyes.
‘Gandalf,’ the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory
a long disused word. ‘Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.’
He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak
wrapped it about him: it seemed as if the sun had been shining, but
now was hid in cloud again. ‘Yes, you may still call me Gandalf,’ he
said, and the voice was the voice of their old friend and guide. ‘Get
up, my good Gimli! No blame to you, and no harm done to me.
Indeed my friends, none of you have any weapon that could hurt
me. Be merry! We meet again. At the turn of the tide. The great
storm is coming, but the tide has turned.’
He laid his hand on Gimli’s head, and the Dwarf looked up and
laughed suddenly. ‘Gandalf !’ he said. ‘But you are all in white!’
‘Yes, I am white now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Indeed I am Saruman, one
might almost say, Saruman as he should have been. But come now,
tell me of yourselves! I have passed through ﬁre and deep water,
since we parted. I have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and
learned again much that I had forgotten. I can see many things far
off, but many things that are close at hand I cannot see. Tell me of
yourselves!’
‘What do you wish to know?’ said Aragorn. ‘All that has happened
since we parted on the bridge would be a long tale. Will you not ﬁrst
give us news of the hobbits? Did you ﬁnd them, and are they safe?’
‘No, I did not ﬁnd them,’ said Gandalf. ‘There was a darkness
over the valleys of the Emyn Muil, and I did not know of their
captivity, until the eagle told me.’
‘The eagle!’ said Legolas. ‘I have seen an eagle high and far off:
the last time was four days ago, above the Emyn Muil.’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘that was Gwaihir the Windlord, who rescued
me from Orthanc. I sent him before me to watch the River and gather
tidings. His sight is keen, but he cannot see all that passes under hill
and tree. Some things he has seen, and others I have seen myself.
The Ring now has passed beyond my help, or the help of any of the
Company that set out from Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to
the Enemy, but it escaped. I had some part in that: for I sat in a high
place, and I strove with the Dark Tower; and the Shadow passed.
Then I was weary, very weary; and I walked long in dark thought.’
‘Then you know about Frodo!’ said Gimli. ‘How do things go
with him?’

496

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before
him still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is
all that I can say.’
‘Not alone,’ said Legolas. ‘We think that Sam went with him.’
‘Did he!’ said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a
smile on his face. ‘Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not
surprise me. Good! Very good! You lighten my heart. You must tell
me more. Now sit by me and tell me the tale of your journey.’
The companions sat on the ground at his feet, and Aragorn took
up the tale. For a long while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no
questions. His hands were spread upon his knees, and his eyes were
closed. At last when Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of
his last journey upon the Great River, the old man sighed.
‘You have not said all that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend,’
he said quietly. ‘Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to
him. It was a sore trial for such a man: a warrior, and a lord of men.
Galadriel told me that he was in peril. But he escaped in the end. I
am glad. It was not in vain that the young hobbits came with us, if
only for Boromir’s sake. But that is not the only part they have to
play. They were brought to Fangorn, and their coming was like the
falling of small stones that starts an avalanche in the mountains. Even
as we talk here, I hear the ﬁrst rumblings. Saruman had best not be
caught away from home when the dam bursts!’
‘In one thing you have not changed, dear friend,’ said Aragorn:
‘you still speak in riddles.’
‘What? In riddles?’ said Gandalf. ‘No! For I was talking aloud to
myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present to
speak to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.’
He laughed, but the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam
of sunshine.
‘I am no longer young even in the reckoning of Men of the Ancient
Houses,’ said Aragorn. ‘Will you not open your mind more clearly
to me?’
‘What then shall I say?’ said Gandalf, and paused for a while in
thought. ‘This in brief is how I see things at the moment, if you wish
to have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of
course, has long known that the Ring is abroad, and that it is borne
by a hobbit. He knows now the number of our Company that set
out from Rivendell, and the kind of each of us. But he does not yet
perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes that we were all going to
Minas Tirith; for that is what he would himself have done in our
place. And according to his wisdom it would have been a heavy stroke
against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what mighty

THE WHITE RIDER

497

one may suddenly appear, wielding the Ring, and assailing him with
war, seeking to cast him down and take his place. That we should
wish to cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought
that occurs to his mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself
has not yet entered into his darkest dream. In which no doubt you
will see our good fortune and our hope. For imagining war he has
let loose war, believing that he has no time to waste; for he that
strikes the ﬁrst blow, if he strikes it hard enough, may need to strike
no more. So the forces that he has long been preparing he is now
setting in motion, sooner than he intended. Wise fool. For if he had
used all his power to guard Mordor, so that none could enter, and
bent all his guile to the hunting of the Ring, then indeed hope would
have faded: neither Ring nor bearer could long have eluded him. But
now his eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he
looks towards Minas Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon
it like a storm.
‘For already he knows that the messengers that he sent to waylay
the Company have failed again. They have not found the Ring.
Neither have they brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they
done even so much as that, it would have been a heavy blow to us,
and it might have been fatal. But let us not darken our hearts by
imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the Dark Tower. For the
Enemy has failed – so far. Thanks to Saruman.’
‘Then is not Saruman a traitor?’ said Gimli.
‘Indeed yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘Doubly. And is not that strange? Nothing that we have endured of late has seemed so grievous as the treason
of Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown
very strong. He threatens the Men of Rohan and draws off their help
from Minas Tirith, even as the main blow is approaching from the
East. Yet a treacherous weapon is ever a danger to the hand. Saruman
also had a mind to capture the Ring, for himself, or at least to snare
some hobbits for his evil purposes. So between them our enemies
have contrived only to bring Merry and Pippin with marvellous speed,
and in the nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they would
never have come at all!
‘Also they have ﬁlled themselves with new doubts that disturb
their plans. No tidings of the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to
the horsemen of Rohan; but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits
were taken in the Emyn Muil and borne away towards Isengard
against the will of his own servants. He now has Isengard to fear as
well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls, it will go ill with Saruman.’
‘It is a pity that our friends lie in between,’ said Gimli. ‘If no land
divided Isengard and Mordor, then they could ﬁght while we watched
and waited.’

498

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘The victor would emerge stronger than either, and free from
doubt,’ said Gandalf. ‘But Isengard cannot ﬁght Mordor, unless
Saruman ﬁrst obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does
not yet know his peril. There is much that he does not know. He
was so eager to lay his hands on his prey that he could not wait at
home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on his messengers. But
he came too late, for once, and the battle was over and beyond his
help before he reached these parts. He did not remain here long. I
look into his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He
believes that the horsemen slew and burned all upon the ﬁeld of
battle; but he does not know whether the Orcs were bringing any
prisoners or not. And he does not know of the quarrel between his
servants and the Orcs of Mordor; nor does he know of the Winged
Messenger.’
‘The Winged Messenger!’ cried Legolas. ‘I shot at him with the
bow of Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled him from the sky.
He ﬁlled us all with fear. What new terror is this?’
‘One that you cannot slay with arrows,’ said Gandalf. ‘You only
slew his steed. It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed
again. For he was a Nazgûl, one of the Nine, who ride now upon
winged steeds. Soon their terror will overshadow the last armies of
our friends, cutting off the sun. But they have not yet been allowed
to cross the River, and Saruman does not know of this new shape in
which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought is ever on the
Ring. Was it present in the battle? Was it found? What if Théoden,
Lord of the Mark, should come by it and learn of its power? That is
the danger that he sees, and he has ﬂed back to Isengard to double
and treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another
danger, close at hand, which he does not see, busy with his ﬁery
thoughts. He has forgotten Treebeard.’
‘Now you speak to yourself again,’ said Aragorn with a smile.
‘Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of Saruman’s
double treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two
hobbits to Fangorn has served, save to give us a long and fruitless
chase.’
‘Wait a minute!’ cried Gimli. ‘There is another thing that I should
like to know ﬁrst. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last
night?’
‘You certainly did not see me,’ answered Gandalf, ‘therefore I
must guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike
that your desire to make an incurable dent in my hat must be
excused.’
‘Good, good!’ said Gimli. ‘I am glad that it was not you.’
Gandalf laughed again. ‘Yes, my good Dwarf,’ he said, ‘it is a

THE WHITE RIDER

499

comfort not to be mistaken at all points. Do I not know it only too
well! But, of course, I never blamed you for your welcome of me.
How could I do so, who have so often counselled my friends to
suspect even their own hands when dealing with the Enemy. Bless
you, Gimli, son of Glóin! Maybe you will see us both together one
day and judge between us!’
‘But the hobbits!’ Legolas broke in. ‘We have come far to seek
them, and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?’
‘With Treebeard and the Ents,’ said Gandalf.
‘The Ents!’ exclaimed Aragorn. ‘Then there is truth in the old
legends about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds
of the trees? Are there still Ents in the world? I thought they were
only a memory of ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than
a legend of Rohan.’
‘A legend of Rohan!’ cried Legolas. ‘Nay, every Elf in Wilderland
has sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even
among us they are only a memory. If I were to meet one still walking
in this world, then indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard:
that is only a rendering of Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet
you seem to speak of a person. Who is this Treebeard?’
‘Ah! now you are asking much,’ said Gandalf. ‘The little that I
know of his long slow story would make a tale for which we have no
time now. Treebeard is Fangorn, the guardian of the forest; he is the
oldest of the Ents, the oldest living thing that still walks beneath the
Sun upon this Middle-earth. I hope indeed, Legolas, that you may
yet meet him. Merry and Pippin have been fortunate: they met him
here, even where we sit. For he came here two days ago and bore
them away to his dwelling far off by the roots of the mountains. He
often comes here, especially when his mind is uneasy, and rumours
of the world outside trouble him. I saw him four days ago striding
among the trees, and I think he saw me, for he paused; but I did not
speak, for I was heavy with thought, and weary after my struggle with
the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.’
‘Perhaps he also thought that you were Saruman,’ said Gimli.
‘But you speak of him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was
dangerous.’
‘Dangerous!’ cried Gandalf. ‘And so am I, very dangerous: more
dangerous than anything you will ever meet, unless you are brought
alive before the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous,
and Legolas is dangerous. You are beset with dangers, Gimli son of
Glóin; for you are dangerous yourself, in your own fashion. Certainly
the forest of Fangorn is perilous – not least to those that are too
ready with their axes; and Fangorn himself, he is perilous too; yet
he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now his long slow wrath is

500

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

brimming over, and all the forest is ﬁlled with it. The coming of the
hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: it will soon
be running like a ﬂood; but its tide is turned against Saruman and
the axes of Isengard. A thing is about to happen which has not
happened since the Elder Days: the Ents are going to wake up and
ﬁnd that they are strong.’
‘What will they do?’ asked Legolas in astonishment.
‘I do not know,’ said Gandalf. ‘I do not think they know themselves. I wonder.’ He fell silent, his head bowed in thought.
The others looked at him. A gleam of sun through ﬂeeting clouds
fell on his hands, which lay now upturned on his lap: they seemed
to be ﬁlled with light as a cup is with water. At last he looked up
and gazed straight at the sun.
‘The morning is wearing away,’ he said. ‘Soon we must go.’
‘Do we go to ﬁnd our friends and to see Treebeard?’ asked Aragorn.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘That is not the road that you must take. I
have spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory.
War is upon us and all our friends, a war in which only the use of
the Ring could give us surety of victory. It ﬁlls me with great sorrow
and great fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am
Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.’
He rose and gazed out eastward, shading his eyes, as if he saw
things far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head.
‘No,’ he said in a soft voice, ‘it has gone beyond our reach. Of that
at least let us be glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring.
We must go down to face a peril near despair, yet that deadly peril
is removed.’
He turned. ‘Come, Aragorn son of Arathorn!’ he said. ‘Do not
regret your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil, nor call it a vain
pursuit. You chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the choice
was just, and it has been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who
otherwise might have met too late. But the quest of your companions
is over. Your next journey is marked by your given word. You must
go to Edoras and seek out Théoden in his hall. For you are needed.
The light of Andúril must now be uncovered in the battle for which
it has so long waited. There is war in Rohan, and worse evil: it goes
ill with Théoden.’
‘Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?’ said
Legolas.
‘I did not say so,’ said Gandalf. ‘Who knows? Have patience. Go
where you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.’
‘It is a long way for a man to walk, young or old,’ said Aragorn.
‘I fear the battle will be over long ere I come there.’

THE WHITE RIDER

501

‘We shall see, we shall see,’ said Gandalf. ‘Will you come now
with me?’
‘Yes, we will set out together,’ said Aragorn. ‘But I do not doubt
that you will come there before me, if you wish.’ He rose and looked
long at Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood
there facing one another. The grey ﬁgure of the Man, Aragorn son
of Arathorn, was tall, and stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of
his sword; he looked as if some king out of the mists of the sea had
stepped upon the shores of lesser men. Before him stooped the old
ﬁgure, white, shining now as if with some light kindled within, bent,
laden with years, but holding a power beyond the strength of kings.
‘Do I not say truly, Gandalf,’ said Aragorn at last, ‘that you could
go whithersoever you wished quicker than I? And this I also say: you
are our captain and our banner. The Dark Lord has Nine. But we
have One, mightier than they: the White Rider. He has passed
through the ﬁre and the abyss, and they shall fear him. We will go
where he leads.’
‘Yes, together we will follow you,’ said Legolas. ‘But ﬁrst, it would
ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you in Moria. Will you
not tell us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were
delivered?’
‘I have stayed already too long,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Time is short.
But if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.’
‘Then tell us what you will, and time allows!’ said Gimli. ‘Come,
Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!’
‘Name him not!’ said Gandalf, and for a moment it seemed that
a cloud of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as
death. ‘Long time I fell,’ he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back
with difﬁculty. ‘Long I fell, and he fell with me. His ﬁre was about
me. I was burned. Then we plunged into the deep water and all was
dark. Cold it was as the tide of death: almost it froze my heart.’
‘Deep is the abyss that is spanned by Durin’s Bridge, and none
has measured it,’ said Gimli.
‘Yet it has a bottom, beyond light and knowledge,’ said Gandalf.
‘Thither I came at last, to the uttermost foundations of stone. He
was with me still. His ﬁre was quenched, but now he was a thing of
slime, stronger than a strangling snake.
‘We fought far under the living earth, where time is not counted.
Ever he clutched me, and ever I hewed him, till at last he ﬂed into
dark tunnels. They were not made by Durin’s folk, Gimli son of
Glóin. Far, far below the deepest delvings of the Dwarves, the world
is gnawed by nameless things. Even Sauron knows them not. They
are older than he. Now I have walked there, but I will bring no report

502

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

to darken the light of day. In that despair my enemy was my only
hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel. Thus he brought me
back at last to the secret ways of Khazad-dûm: too well he knew
them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.’
‘Long has that been lost,’ said Gimli. ‘Many have said that it was
never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.’
‘It was made, and it had not been destroyed,’ said Gandalf. ‘From
the lowest dungeon to the highest peak it climbed, ascending in
unbroken spiral in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in
Durin’s Tower carved in the living rock of Zirakzigil, the pinnacle of
the Silvertine.
‘There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before
it lay a narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world. The
sun shone ﬁercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud. Out
he sprang, and even as I came behind, he burst into new ﬂame. There
was none to see, or perhaps in after ages songs would still be sung
of the Battle of the Peak.’ Suddenly Gandalf laughed. ‘But what
would they say in song? Those that looked up from afar thought that
the mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard, and
lightning, they said, smote upon Celebdil, and leaped back broken
into tongues of ﬁre. Is not that enough? A great smoke rose about
us, vapour and steam. Ice fell like rain. I threw down my enemy, and
he fell from the high place and broke the mountain-side where he
smote it in his ruin. Then darkness took me, and I strayed out of
thought and time, and I wandered far on roads that I will not tell.
‘Naked I was sent back – for a brief time, until my task is done.
And naked I lay upon the mountain-top. The tower behind was
crumbled into dust, the window gone; the ruined stair was choked
with burned and broken stone. I was alone, forgotten, without escape
upon the hard horn of the world. There I lay staring upward, while
the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long as a life-age of the
earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all lands: the
springing and the dying, the song and the weeping, and the slow
everlasting groan of over-burdened stone. And so at the last Gwaihir
the Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away.
‘ ‘‘Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,’’ I said.
‘ ‘‘A burden you have been,’’ he answered, ‘‘but not so now. Light
as a swan’s feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines through you.
Indeed I do not think you need me any more: were I to let you fall,
you would ﬂoat upon the wind.’’
‘ ‘‘Do not let me fall!’’ I gasped, for I felt life in me again. ‘‘Bear
me to Lothlórien!’’
‘ ‘‘That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent
me to look for you,’’ he answered.

THE WHITE RIDER

503

‘Thus it was that I came to Caras Galadhon and found you but
lately gone. I tarried there in the ageless time of that land where days
bring healing not decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed in white.
Counsel I gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came,
and messages I bring to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to
say this:
Where now are the Dúnedain, Elessar, Elessar?
Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar?
Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth,
And the Grey Company ride from the North.
But dark is the path appointed for thee:
The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea.
To Legolas she sent this word:
Legolas Greenleaf long under tree
In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea!
If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore,
Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.’
Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.
‘Then she sent me no message?’ said Gimli and bent his head.
‘Dark are her words,’ said Legolas, ‘and little do they mean to
those that receive them.’
‘That is no comfort,’ said Gimli.
‘What then?’ said Legolas. ‘Would you have her speak openly to
you of your death?’
‘Yes, if she had naught else to say.’
‘What is that?’ said Gandalf, opening his eyes. ‘Yes, I think I can
guess what her words may mean. Your pardon, Gimli! I was pondering the messages once again. But indeed she sent words to you,
and neither dark nor sad.
‘ ‘‘To Gimli son of Glóin,’’ she said, ‘‘give his Lady’s greeting.
Lockbearer, wherever thou goest my thought goes with thee. But
have a care to lay thine axe to the right tree!’’ ’
‘In happy hour you have returned to us, Gandalf,’ cried the Dwarf,
capering as he sang loudly in the strange dwarf-tongue. ‘Come,
come!’ he shouted, swinging his axe. ‘Since Gandalf ’s head is now
sacred, let us ﬁnd one that it is right to cleave!’
‘That will not be far to seek,’ said Gandalf, rising from his seat.
‘Come! We have spent all the time that is allowed to a meeting of
parted friends. Now there is need of haste.’
*
*
*

504

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He wrapped himself again in his old tattered cloak, and led the
way. Following him they descended quickly from the high shelf and
made their way back through the forest, down the bank of the
Entwash. They spoke no more words, until they stood again upon
the grass beyond the eaves of Fangorn. There was no sign of their
horses to be seen.
‘They have not returned,’ said Legolas. ‘It will be a weary walk!’
‘I shall not walk. Time presses,’ said Gandalf. Then lifting up his
head he gave a long whistle. So clear and piercing was the note that
the others stood amazed to hear such a sound come from those old
bearded lips. Three times he whistled; and then faint and far off it
seemed to them that they heard the whinny of a horse borne up from
the plains upon the eastern wind. They waited wondering. Before
long there came the sound of hoofs, at ﬁrst hardly more than a tremor
of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as he lay upon the grass,
then growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick beat.
‘There is more than one horse coming,’ said Aragorn.
‘Certainly,’ said Gandalf. ‘We are too great a burden for one.’
‘There are three,’ said Legolas, gazing out over the plain. ‘See
how they run! There is Hasufel, and there is my friend Arod beside
him! But there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I
have not seen his like before.’
‘Nor will you again,’ said Gandalf. ‘That is Shadowfax. He is the
chief of the Mearas, lords of horses, and not even Théoden, King of
Rohan, has ever looked on a better. Does he not shine like silver,
and run as smoothly as a swift stream? He has come for me: the
horse of the White Rider. We are going to battle together.’
Even as the old wizard spoke, the great horse came striding up
the slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane ﬂowing
in the wind of his speed. The two others followed, now far behind.
As soon as Shadowfax saw Gandalf, he checked his pace and whinnied loudly; then trotting gently forward he stooped his proud head
and nuzzled his great nostrils against the old man’s neck.
Gandalf caressed him. ‘It is a long way from Rivendell, my friend,’
he said; ‘but you are wise and swift and come at need. Far let us ride
now together, and part not in this world again!’
Soon the other horses came up and stood quietly by, as if awaiting
orders. ‘We go at once to Meduseld, the hall of your master,
Théoden,’ said Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their
heads. ‘Time presses, so with your leave, my friends, we will ride.
We beg you to use all the speed that you can. Hasufel shall bear
Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli before me, and by his
leave Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now only to drink
a little.’

THE WHITE RIDER

505

‘Now I understand a part of last night’s riddle,’ said Legolas as
he sprang lightly upon Arod’s back. ‘Whether they ﬂed at ﬁrst in
fear, or not, our horses met Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted
him with joy. Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf ?’
‘Yes, I knew,’ said the wizard. ‘I bent my thought upon him,
bidding him to make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south
of this land. Swiftly may he bear me back again!’
Gandalf spoke now to Shadowfax, and the horse set off at a good
pace, yet not beyond the measure of the others. After a little while
he turned suddenly, and choosing a place where the banks were
lower, he waded the river, and then led them away due south into a
ﬂat land, treeless and wide. The wind went like grey waves through
the endless miles of grass. There was no sign of road or track, but
Shadowfax did not stay or falter.
‘He is steering a straight course now for the halls of Théoden
under the slopes of the White Mountains,’ said Gandalf. ‘It will be
quicker so. The ground is ﬁrmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief
northward track lies, across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way
through every fen and hollow.’
For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands.
Often the grass was so high that it reached above the knees of the
riders, and their steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea.
They came upon many hidden pools, and broad acres of sedge waving
above wet and treacherous bogs; but Shadowfax found the way, and
the other horses followed in his swath. Slowly the sun fell from the
sky down into the West. Looking out over the great plain, far away
the riders saw it for a moment like a red ﬁre sinking into the grass.
Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red
upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun’s
disc to the hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed
down under the rim of earth.
‘There lies the Gap of Rohan,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is now almost due
west of us. That way lies Isengard.’
‘I see a great smoke,’ said Legolas. ‘What may that be?’
‘Battle and war!’ said Gandalf. ‘Ride on!’

Chapter 6
THE KING OF THE
GOLDEN HALL
They rode on through sunset, and slow dusk, and gathering night.
When at last they halted and dismounted, even Aragorn was stiff and
weary. Gandalf only allowed them a few hours’ rest. Legolas and
Gimli slept, and Aragorn lay ﬂat, stretched upon his back; but Gandalf stood, leaning on his staff, gazing into the darkness, east and
west. All was silent, and there was no sign or sound of living thing.
The night was barred with long clouds, ﬂeeting on a chill wind, when
they arose again. Under the cold moon they went on once more, as
swift as by the light of day.
Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would
have fallen from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him.
Hasufel and Arod, weary but proud, followed their tireless leader, a
grey shadow before them hardly to be seen. The miles went by. The
waxing moon sank into the cloudy West.
A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark faded
to a cold grey. Red shafts of light leapt above the black walls of the
Emyn Muil far away upon their left. Dawn came clear and bright; a
wind swept across their path, rushing through the bent grasses. Suddenly Shadowfax stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead.
‘Look!’ he cried, and they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood
the mountains of the South: white-tipped and streaked with black.
The grass-lands rolled against the hills that clustered at their feet,
and ﬂowed up into many valleys still dim and dark, untouched by the
light of dawn, winding their way into the heart of the great mountains.
Immediately before the travellers the widest of these glens opened
like a long gulf among the hills. Far inward they glimpsed a tumbled
mountain-mass with one tall peak; at the mouth of the vale there
stood like a sentinel a lonely height. About its feet there ﬂowed, as
a thread of silver, the stream that issued from the dale; upon its brow
they caught, still far away, a glint in the rising sun, a glimmer of gold.
‘Speak, Legolas!’ said Gandalf. ‘Tell us what you see there before
us!’
Legolas gazed ahead, shading his eyes from the level shafts of the
new-risen sun. ‘I see a white stream that comes down from the snows,’
he said. ‘Where it issues from the shadow of the vale a green hill

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

507

rises upon the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle
it. Within there rise the roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon
a green terrace, there stands aloft a great hall of Men. And it seems
to my eyes that it is thatched with gold. The light of it shines far
over the land. Golden, too, are the posts of its doors. There men in
bright mail stand; but all else within the courts are yet asleep.’
‘Edoras those courts are called,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Meduseld is
that golden hall. There dwells Théoden son of Thengel, King of the
Mark of Rohan. We are come with the rising of the day. Now the
road lies plain to see before us. But we must ride more warily; for
war is abroad, and the Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, do not sleep, even
if it seem so from afar. Draw no weapon, speak no haughty word, I
counsel you all, until we are come before Théoden’s seat.’
The morning was bright and clear about them, and birds were
singing, when the travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly
into the plain, and beyond the feet of the hills turned across their
path in a wide bend, ﬂowing away east to feed the Entwash far off
in its reed-choked beds. The land was green: in the wet meads and
along the grassy borders of the stream grew many willow-trees.
Already in this southern land they were blushing red at their ﬁngertips, feeling the approach of spring. Over the stream there was a ford
between low banks much trampled by the passage of horses. The
travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading
towards the uplands.
At the foot of the walled hill the way ran under the shadow of
many mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass
was white as with a drifted snow: small ﬂowers sprang there like
countless stars amid the turf.
‘Look!’ said Gandalf. ‘How fair are the bright eyes in the grass!
Evermind they are called, simbelmynë in this land of Men, for they
blossom in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men
rest. Behold! we are come to the great barrows where the sires of
Théoden sleep.’
‘Seven mounds upon the left, and nine upon the right,’ said Aragorn.
‘Many long lives of men it is since the golden hall was built.’
‘Five hundred times have the red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my
home since then,’ said Legolas, ‘and but a little while does that seem
to us.’
‘But to the Riders of the Mark it seems so long ago,’ said Aragorn,
‘that the raising of this house is but a memory of song, and the years
before are lost in the mist of time. Now they call this land their home,
their own, and their speech is sundered from their northern kin.’
Then he began to chant softly in a slow tongue unknown to the

508

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Elf and Dwarf; yet they listened, for there was a strong music in it.
‘That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,’ said Legolas; ‘for
it is like to this land itself; rich and rolling in part, and else hard and
stern as the mountains. But I cannot guess what it means, save that
it is laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.’
‘It runs thus in the Common Speech,’ said Aragorn, ‘as near as I
can make it.
Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was
blowing?
Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair ﬂowing?
Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red ﬁre glowing?
Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing?
They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the
meadow;
The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.
Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning,
Or behold the ﬂowing years from the Sea returning?
Thus spoke a forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall
and fair was Eorl the Young, who rode down out of the North; and
there were wings upon the feet of his steed, Felaróf, father of horses.
So men still sing in the evening.’
With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the winding way up the green shoulders of the hills, they came
at last to the wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.
There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their
feet and barred the way with spears. ‘Stay, strangers here unknown!’
they cried in the tongue of the Riddermark, demanding the names
and errand of the strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friendliness; and they looked darkly upon Gandalf.
‘Well do I understand your speech,’ he answered in the same
language; ‘yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in
the Common Tongue, as is the custom in the West, if you wish to
be answered?’
‘It is the will of Théoden King that none should enter his gates,
save those who know our tongue and are our friends,’ replied one of
the guards. ‘None are welcome here in days of war but our own folk,
and those that come from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who
are you that come heedless over the plain thus strangely clad, riding
horses like to our own horses? Long have we kept guard here, and
we have watched you from afar. Never have we seen other riders so
strange, nor any horse more proud than is one of these that bear you.
He is one of the Mearas, unless our eyes are cheated by some spell.

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

509

Say, are you not a wizard, some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of
his craft? Speak now and be swift!’
‘We are no phantoms,’ said Aragorn, ‘nor do your eyes cheat you.
For indeed these are your own horses that we ride, as you knew well
ere you asked, I guess. But seldom does thief ride home to the stable.
´
Here are Hasufel and Arod, that Eomer,
the Third Marshal of the
Mark, lent to us, only two days ago. We bring them back now, even
´
as we promised him. Has not Eomer
then returned and given warning
of our coming?’
´
A troubled look came into the guard’s eyes. ‘Of Eomer
I have
naught to say,’ he answered. ‘If what you tell me is truth, then doubtless Théoden will have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not
wholly unlooked-for. It is but two nights ago that Wormtongue came
to us and said that by the will of Théoden no stranger should pass
these gates.’
‘Wormtongue?’ said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. ‘Say
no more! My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the
Mark himself. I am in haste. Will you not go or send to say that we
are come?’ His eyes glinted under his deep brows as he bent his gaze
upon the man.
‘Yes, I will go,’ he answered slowly. ‘But what names shall I report?
And what shall I say of you? Old and weary you seem now, and yet
you are fell and grim beneath, I deem.’
‘Well do you see and speak,’ said the wizard. ‘For I am Gandalf.
I have returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is
Shadowfax the Great, whom no other hand can tame. And here
beside me is Aragorn son of Arathorn, the heir of Kings, and it is to
Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas the Elf and Gimli the
Dwarf, our comrades. Go now and say to your master that we are
at his gates and would have speech with him, if he will permit us to
come into his hall.’
‘Strange names you give indeed! But I will report them as you
bid, and learn my master’s will,’ said the guard. ‘Wait here a little
while, and I will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do
not hope too much! These are dark days.’ He went swiftly away,
leaving the strangers in the watchful keeping of his comrades.
After some time he returned. ‘Follow me!’ he said. ‘Théoden gives
you leave to enter; but any weapon that you bear, be it only a staff,
you must leave on the threshold. The doorwardens will keep them.’
The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking
in ﬁle behind their guide. They found a broad path, paved with hewn
stones, now winding upward, now climbing in short ﬂights of well-laid
steps. Many houses built of wood and many dark doors they passed.

510

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Beside the way in a stone channel a stream of clear water ﬂowed,
sparkling and chattering. At length they came to the crown of the
hill. There stood a high platform above a green terrace, at the foot
of which a bright spring gushed from a stone carved in the likeness
of a horse’s head; beneath was a wide basin from which the water
spilled and fed the falling stream. Up the green terrace went a stair
of stone, high and broad, and on either side of the topmost step were
stone-hewn seats. There sat other guards, with drawn swords laid
upon their knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders;
the sun was blazoned upon their green shields, their long corslets
were burnished bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than
mortal men.
‘There are the doors before you,’ said the guide. ‘I must return
now to my duty at the gate. Farewell! And may the Lord of the Mark
be gracious to you!’
He turned and went swiftly back down the road. The others
climbed the long stair under the eyes of the tall watchmen. Silent
they stood now above and spoke no word, until Gandalf stepped out
upon the paved terrace at the stair’s head. Then suddenly with clear
voices they spoke a courteous greeting in their own tongue.
‘Hail, comers from afar!’ they said, and they turned the hilts of
their swords towards the travellers in token of peace. Green gems
ﬂashed in the sunlight. Then one of the guards stepped forward and
spoke in the Common Speech.
‘I am the Doorward of Théoden,’ he said. ‘Háma is my name.
Here I must bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.’
Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver-hafted knife, his quiver,
and his bow. ‘Keep these well,’ he said, ‘for they come from the
Golden Wood and the Lady of Lothlórien gave them to me.’
Wonder came into the man’s eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily
by the wall, as if he feared to handle them. ‘No man will touch them,
I promise you,’ he said.
Aragorn stood a while hesitating. ‘It is not my will,’ he said, ‘to put
aside my sword or to deliver Andúril to the hand of any other man.’
‘It is the will of Théoden,’ said Háma.
‘It is not clear to me that the will of Théoden son of Thengel,
even though he be lord of the Mark, should prevail over the will of
Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elendil’s heir of Gondor.’
‘This is the house of Théoden, not of Aragorn, even were he King
of Gondor in the seat of Denethor,’ said Háma, stepping swiftly
before the doors and barring the way. His sword was now in his hand
and the point towards the strangers.
‘This is idle talk,’ said Gandalf. ‘Needless is Théoden’s demand,

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

511

but it is useless to refuse. A king will have his way in his own hall,
be it folly or wisdom.’
‘Truly,’ said Aragorn. ‘And I would do as the master of the house
bade me, were this only a woodman’s cot, if I bore now any sword
but Andúril.’
‘Whatever its name may be,’ said Háma, ‘here you shall lay it, if
you would not ﬁght alone against all the men in Edoras.’
‘Not alone!’ said Gimli, ﬁngering the blade of his axe, and looking
darkly up at the guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a
mind to fell. ‘Not alone!’
‘Come, come!’ said Gandalf. ‘We are all friends here. Or should
be; for the laughter of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel.
My errand is pressing. Here at least is my sword, goodman Háma.
Keep it well. Glamdring it is called, for the Elves made it long ago.
Now let me pass. Come, Aragorn!’
Slowly Aragorn unbuckled his belt and himself set his sword
upright against the wall. ‘Here I set it,’ he said; ‘but I command you
not to touch it, nor to permit any other to lay hand on it. In this
Elvish sheath dwells the Blade that was Broken and has been made
again. Telchar ﬁrst wrought it in the deeps of time. Death shall come
to any man that draws Elendil’s sword save Elendil’s heir.’
The guard stepped back and looked with amazement on Aragorn.
‘It seems that you are come on the wings of song out of the forgotten
days,’ he said. ‘It shall be, lord, as you command.’
‘Well,’ said Gimli, ‘if it has Andúril to keep it company, my axe
may stay here, too, without shame’; and he laid it on the ﬂoor. ‘Now
then, if all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.’
The guard still hesitated. ‘Your staff,’ he said to Gandalf. ‘Forgive
me, but that too must be left at the doors.’
‘Foolishness!’ said Gandalf. ‘Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is another. I am old. If I may not lean on my stick as I go, then
I will sit out here, until it pleases Théoden to hobble out himself to
speak with me.’
Aragorn laughed. ‘Every man has something too dear to trust to
another. But would you part an old man from his support? Come,
will you not let us enter?’
‘The staff in the hand of a wizard may be more than a prop for
age,’ said Háma. He looked hard at the ash-staff on which Gandalf
leaned. ‘Yet in doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom.
I believe you are friends and folk worthy of honour, who have no
evil purpose. You may go in.’
The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung
them slowly inwards grumbling on their great hinges. The travellers

512

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

entered. Inside it seemed dark and warm after the clear air upon the
hill. The hall was long and wide and ﬁlled with shadows and half
lights; mighty pillars upheld its lofty roof. But here and there bright
sunbeams fell in glimmering shafts from the eastern windows, high
under the deep eaves. Through the louver in the roof, above the thin
wisps of issuing smoke, the sky showed pale and blue. As their eyes
changed, the travellers perceived that the ﬂoor was paved with stones
of many hues; branching runes and strange devices intertwined
beneath their feet. They saw now that the pillars were richly carved,
gleaming dully with gold and half-seen colours. Many woven cloths
were hung upon the walls, and over their wide spaces marched ﬁgures
of ancient legend, some dim with years, some darkling in the shade.
But upon one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse.
He was blowing a great horn, and his yellow hair was ﬂying in the
wind. The horse’s head was lifted, and its nostrils were wide and red
as it neighed, smelling battle afar. Foaming water, green and white,
rushed and curled about its knees.
‘Behold Eorl the Young!’ said Aragorn. ‘Thus he rode out of the
North to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.’
Now the four companions went forward, past the clear wood-ﬁre
burning upon the long hearth in the midst of the hall. Then they
halted. At the far end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing
north towards the doors, was a dais with three steps; and in the
middle of the dais was a great gilded chair. Upon it sat a man so
bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but his white hair was
long and thick and fell in great braids from beneath a thin golden
circlet set upon his brow. In the centre upon his forehead shone a
single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees;
but his eyes still burned with a bright light, glinting as he gazed at
the strangers. Behind his chair stood a woman clad in white. At his
feet upon the steps sat a wizened ﬁgure of a man, with a pale wise
face and heavy-lidded eyes.
There was a silence. The old man did not move in his chair. At
length Gandalf spoke. ‘Hail, Théoden son of Thengel! I have
returned. For behold! the storm comes, and now all friends should
gather together, lest each singly be destroyed.’
Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short
black staff with a handle of white bone; and now the strangers saw
that, bent though he was, he was still tall and must in youth have
been high and proud indeed.
‘I greet you,’ he said, ‘and maybe you look for welcome. But truth
to tell your welcome is doubtful here, Master Gandalf. You have ever
been a herald of woe. Troubles follow you like crows, and ever the

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

513

oftener the worse. I will not deceive you: when I heard that Shadowfax
had come back riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but
´
still more at the lack of the rider; and when Eomer
brought the tidings
that you had gone at last to your long home, I did not mourn. But
news from afar is seldom sooth. Here you come again! And with you
come evils worse than before, as might be expected. Why should I
welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.’ Slowly he sat down
again in his chair.
‘You speak justly, lord,’ said the pale man sitting upon the steps
of the dais. ‘It is not yet ﬁve days since the bitter tidings came that
Théodred your son was slain upon the West Marches: your right´
hand, Second Marshal of the Mark. In Eomer
there is little trust.
Few men would be left to guard your walls, if he had been allowed
to rule. And even now we learn from Gondor that the Dark Lord is
stirring in the East. Such is the hour in which this wanderer chooses
to return. Why indeed should we welcome you, Master Stormcrow?
Láthspell I name you, Ill-news; and ill news is an ill guest they say.’
He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment and gazed
on the strangers with dark eyes.
‘You are held wise, my friend Wormtongue, and are doubtless a
great support to your master,’ answered Gandalf in a soft voice. ‘Yet
in two ways may a man come with evil tidings. He may be a worker
of evil; or he may be such as leaves well alone, and comes only to
bring aid in time of need.’
‘That is so,’ said Wormtongue; ‘but there is a third kind: pickers
of bones, meddlers in other men’s sorrows, carrion-fowl that grow
fat on war. What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what
aid do you bring now? It was aid from us that you sought last time
that you were here. Then my lord bade you choose any horse that
you would and be gone; and to the wonder of all you took Shadowfax
in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to some it seemed
that to speed you from the land the price was not too great. I guess
that it is likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid
rather than render it. Do you bring men? Do you bring horses,
swords, spears? That I would call aid; that is our present need. But
who are these that follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in
grey, and you yourself the most beggar-like of the four!’
‘The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Théoden
son of Thengel,’ said Gandalf. ‘Has not the messenger from your
gate reported the names of my companions? Seldom has any lord of
Rohan received three such guests. Weapons they have laid at your
doors that are worth many a mortal man, even the mightiest. Grey
is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and thus they have passed
through the shadow of great perils to your hall.’

514

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

´
‘Then it is true, as Eomer
reported, that you are in league with
the Sorceress of the Golden Wood?’ said Wormtongue. ‘It is not to
be wondered at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.’
Gimli strode a pace forward, but felt suddenly the hand of Gandalf
clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone.
In Dwimordene, in Lórien
Seldom have walked the feet of Men,
Few mortal eyes have seen the light
That lies there ever, long and bright.
Galadriel! Galadriel!
Clear is the water of your well;
White is the star in your white hand;
Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land
In Dwimordene, in Lórien
More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men.
Thus Gandalf softly sang, and then suddenly he changed. Casting
his tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned no longer on his
staff; and he spoke in a clear cold voice.
‘The wise speak only of what they know, Grı́ma son of Gálmód.
A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and keep your
forked tongue behind your teeth. I have not passed through ﬁre and
death to bandy crooked words with a serving-man till the lightning
falls.’
He raised his staff. There was a roll of thunder. The sunlight was
blotted out from the eastern windows; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night. The ﬁre faded to sullen embers. Only Gandalf
could be seen, standing white and tall before the blackened hearth.
In the gloom they heard the hiss of Wormtongue’s voice: ‘Did I
not counsel you, lord, to forbid his staff ? That fool, Háma, has
betrayed us!’ There was a ﬂash as if lightning had cloven the roof.
Then all was silent. Wormtongue sprawled on his face.
‘Now Théoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?’ said
Gandalf. ‘Do you ask for help?’ He lifted his staff and pointed to a
high window. There the darkness seemed to clear, and through the
opening could be seen, high and far, a patch of shining sky. ‘Not all
is dark. Take courage, Lord of the Mark; for better help you will not
ﬁnd. No counsel have I to give to those that despair. Yet counsel I
could give, and words I could speak to you. Will you hear them?
They are not for all ears. I bid you come out before your doors and
look abroad. Too long have you sat in shadows and trusted to twisted
tales and crooked promptings.’

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

515

Slowly Théoden left his chair. A faint light grew in the hall again.
The woman hastened to the king’s side, taking his arm, and with
faltering steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly
through the hall. Wormtongue remained lying on the ﬂoor. They
came to the doors and Gandalf knocked.
‘Open!’ he cried. ‘The Lord of the Mark comes forth!’
The doors rolled back and a keen air came whistling in. A wind
was blowing on the hill.
‘Send your guards down to the stairs’ foot,’ said Gandalf. ‘And
you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.’
´
‘Go, Eowyn
sister-daughter!’ said the old king. ‘The time for fear
is past.’
The woman turned and went slowly into the house. As she passed
the doors she turned and looked back. Grave and thoughtful was her
glance, as she looked on the king with cool pity in her eyes. Very fair
was her face, and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and
tall she was in her white robe girt with silver; but strong she seemed
and stern as steel, a daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the ﬁrst
´
time in the full light of day beheld Eowyn,
Lady of Rohan, and
thought her fair, fair and cold, like a morning of pale spring that is
not yet come to womanhood. And she now was suddenly aware of
him: tall heir of kings, wise with many winters, greycloaked, hiding
a power that yet she felt. For a moment still as stone she stood, then
turning swiftly she was gone.
‘Now, lord,’ said Gandalf, ‘look out upon your land! Breathe the
free air again!’
From the porch upon the top of the high terrace they could see
beyond the stream the green ﬁelds of Rohan fading into distant grey.
Curtains of wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and
to the west was still dark with thunder, and lightning far away
ﬂickered among the tops of hidden hills. But the wind had shifted
to the north, and already the storm that had come out of the East
was receding, rolling away southward to the sea. Suddenly through
a rent in the clouds behind them a shaft of sun stabbed down. The
falling showers gleamed like silver, and far away the river glittered
like a shimmering glass.
‘It is not so dark here,’ said Théoden.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Nor does age lie so heavily on your shoulders
as some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!’
From the king’s hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones.
He drew himself up, slowly, as a man that is stiff from long bending
over some dull toil. Now tall and straight he stood, and his eyes were
blue as he looked into the opening sky.
‘Dark have been my dreams of late,’ he said, ‘but I feel as one

516

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf.
For I fear that already you have come too late, only to see the last
days of my house. Not long now shall stand the high hall which
Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall devour the high seat. What is to
be done?’
´
‘Much,’ said Gandalf. ‘But ﬁrst send for Eomer.
Do I not guess
rightly that you hold him prisoner, by the counsel of Grı́ma, of him
that all save you name the Wormtongue?’
‘It is true,’ said Théoden. ‘He had rebelled against my commands,
and threatened death to Grı́ma in my hall.’
‘A man may love you and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels,’ said Gandalf.
‘That may be. I will do as you ask. Call Háma to me. Since he
proved untrusty as a doorward, let him become an errand-runner.
The guilty shall bring the guilty to judgement,’ said Théoden, and
his voice was grim, yet he looked at Gandalf and smiled and as he
did so many lines of care were smoothed away and did not return.
When Háma had been summoned and had gone, Gandalf led
Théoden to a stone seat, and then sat himself before the king upon
the topmost stair. Aragorn and his companions stood nearby.
‘There is no time to tell all that you should hear,’ said Gandalf.
‘Yet if my hope is not cheated, a time will come ere long when I can
speak more fully. Behold! you are come into a peril greater even than
the wit of Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see! you
dream no longer. You live. Gondor and Rohan do not stand alone.
The enemy is strong beyond our reckoning, yet we have a hope at
which he has not guessed.’
Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice was low and secret, and
none save the king heard what he said. But ever as he spoke the light
shone brighter in Théoden’s eye, and at the last he rose from his seat
to his full height, and Gandalf beside him, and together they looked
out from the high place towards the East.
‘Verily,’ said Gandalf, now in a loud voice, keen and clear, ‘that
way lies our hope, where sits our greatest fear. Doom hangs still on
a thread. Yet hope there is still, if we can but stand unconquered for
a little while.’
The others too now turned their eyes eastward. Over the sundering
leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope
and fear bore their thoughts still on, beyond dark mountains to the
Land of Shadow. Where now was the Ring-bearer? How thin indeed
was the thread upon which doom still hung! It seemed to Legolas,
as he strained his farseeing eyes, that he caught a glint of white: far
away perchance the sun twinkled on a pinnacle of the Tower of

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

517

Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet a present threat,
there was a tiny tongue of ﬂame.
Slowly Théoden sat down again, as if weariness still struggled to
master him against the will of Gandalf. He turned and looked at his
great house. ‘Alas!’ he said, ‘that these evil days should be mine, and
should come in my old age instead of that peace which I have earned.
Alas for Boromir the brave! The young perish and the old linger,
withering.’ He clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands.
‘Your ﬁngers would remember their old strength better, if they
grasped a sword-hilt,’ said Gandalf.
Théoden rose and put his hand to his side; but no sword hung at
his belt. ‘Where has Grı́ma stowed it?’ he muttered under his breath.
‘Take this, dear lord!’ said a clear voice. ‘It was ever at your
service.’ Two men had come softly up the stair and stood now a few
´
steps from the top. Eomer
was there. No helm was on his head, no
mail was on his breast, but in his hand he held a drawn sword; and
as he knelt he offered the hilt to his master.
‘How comes this?’ said Théoden sternly. He turned towards
´
Eomer,
and the men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud
and erect. Where was the old man whom they had left crouching in
his chair or leaning on his stick?
‘It is my doing, lord,’ said Háma, trembling. ‘I understood that
Éomer was to be set free. Such joy was in my heart that maybe I
have erred. Yet, since he was free again, and he a Marshal of the
Mark, I brought him his sword as he bade me.’
´
‘To lay at your feet, my lord,’ said Eomer.
´
For a moment of silence Théoden stood looking down at Eomer
as he knelt still before him. Neither moved.
‘Will you not take the sword?’ said Gandalf.
Slowly Théoden stretched forth his hand. As his ﬁngers took the
hilt, it seemed to the watchers that ﬁrmness and strength returned
to his thin arm. Suddenly he lifted the blade and swung it shimmering
and whistling in the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang
clear as he chanted in the tongue of Rohan a call to arms.
Arise now, arise, Riders of Théoden!
Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward.
Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded!
Forth Eorlingas!
The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the
stair. They looked at their lord in amazement, and then as one man
they drew their swords and laid them at his feet. ‘Command us!’ they
said.

518

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

´
‘Westu Théoden hál!’ cried Eomer.
‘It is a joy to us to see you
return into your own. Never again shall it be said, Gandalf, that you
come only with grief !’
´
‘Take back your sword, Eomer,
sister-son!’ said the king. ‘Go,
Háma, and seek my own sword! Grı́ma has it in his keeping. Bring
him to me also. Now, Gandalf, you said that you had counsel to
give, if I would hear it. What is your counsel?’
‘You have yourself already taken it,’ answered Gandalf. ‘To put
´
your trust in Eomer,
rather than in a man of crooked mind. To cast
aside regret and fear. To do the deed at hand. Every man that can
´
ride should be sent west at once, as Eomer
counselled you: we must
ﬁrst destroy the threat of Saruman, while we have time. If we fail,
we fall. If we succeed – then we will face the next task. Meanwhile
your people that are left, the women and the children and the old,
should ﬂy to the refuges that you have in the mountains. Were they
not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let them take
provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves with treasures, great
or small. It is their lives that are at stake.’
‘This counsel seems good to me now,’ said Théoden. ‘Let all my
folk get ready! But you my guests – truly you said, Gandalf, that the
courtesy of my hall is lessened. You have ridden through the night,
and the morning wears away. You have had neither sleep nor food.
A guest-house shall be made ready: there you shall sleep, when you
have eaten.’
‘Nay, lord,’ said Aragorn. ‘There is no rest yet for the weary. The
men of Rohan must ride forth today, and we will ride with them,
axe, sword, and bow. We did not bring them to rest against your
´
wall, Lord of the Mark. And I promised Eomer
that my sword and
his should be drawn together.’
´
‘Now indeed there is hope of victory!’ said Eomer.
‘Hope, yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘But Isengard is strong. And other perils
draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Théoden, when we are gone. Lead
your people swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!’
‘Nay, Gandalf !’ said the king. ‘You do not know your own skill
in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall in the
front of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.’
‘Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,’ said
Aragorn. The armed men that stood near clashed their weapons,
crying: ‘The Lord of the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!’
‘But your people must not be both unarmed and shepherdless,’
said Gandalf. ‘Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?’
‘I will take thought for that ere I go,’ answered Théoden. ‘Here
comes my counsellor.’
*
*
*

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

519

At that moment Háma came again from the hall. Behind him
cringing between two other men, came Grı́ma the Wormtongue. His
face was very white. His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Háma knelt
and presented to Théoden a long sword in a scabbard clasped with
gold and set with green gems.
‘Here, lord, is Herugrim, your ancient blade,’ he said. ‘It was
found in his chest. Loth was he to render up the keys. Many other
things are there which men have missed.’
‘You lie,’ said Wormtongue. ‘And this sword your master himself
gave into my keeping.’
‘And he now requires it of you again,’ said Théoden. ‘Does that
displease you?’
‘Assuredly not, lord,’ said Wormtongue. ‘I care for you and yours
as best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your
strength. Let others deal with these irksome guests. Your meat is
about to be set on the board. Will you not go to it?’
‘I will,’ said Théoden. ‘And let food for my guests be set on the
board beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let
them summon all who dwell nigh! Every man and strong lad able to
bear arms, all who have horses, let them be ready in the saddle at
the gate ere the second hour from noon!’
‘Dear lord!’ cried Wormtongue. ‘It is as I feared. This wizard has
bewitched you. Are none to be left to defend the Golden Hall of
your fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the
Mark?’
‘If this is bewitchment,’ said Théoden, ‘it seems to me more wholesome than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have
had me walking on all fours like a beast. No, not one shall be left,
not even Grı́ma. Grı́ma shall ride too. Go! You have yet time to clean
the rust from your sword.’
‘Mercy, lord!’ whined Wormtongue, grovelling on the ground.
‘Have pity on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your
side! I at least will stand by you when all others have gone. Do not
send your faithful Grı́ma away!’
‘You have my pity,’ said Théoden. ‘And I do not send you from
my side. I go myself to war with my men. I bid you come with me
and prove your faith.’
Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted
look of a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He licked
his lips with a long pale tongue. ‘Such a resolve might be expected
from a lord of the House of Eorl, old though he be,’ he said. ‘But
those who truly love him would spare his failing years. Yet I see that
I come too late. Others, whom the death of my lord would perhaps
grieve less, have already persuaded him. If I cannot undo their

520

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

work, hear me at least in this, lord! One who knows your mind and
honours your commands should be left in Edoras. Appoint a faithful
steward. Let your counsellor Grı́ma keep all things till your return –
and I pray that we may see it, though no wise man will deem it
hopeful.’
´
Eomer
laughed. ‘And if that plea does not excuse you from war,
most noble Wormtongue,’ he said, ‘what ofﬁce of less honour would
you accept? To carry a sack of meal up into the mountains – if any
man would trust you with it?’
´
‘Nay, Eomer,
you do not fully understand the mind of Master
Wormtongue,’ said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him.
‘He is bold and cunning. Even now he plays a game with peril and
wins a throw. Hours of my precious time he has wasted already.
Down, snake!’ he said suddenly in a terrible voice. ‘Down on your
belly! How long is it since Saruman bought you? What was the
promised price? When all the men were dead, you were to pick your
share of the treasure, and take the woman you desire? Too long have
you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.’
´
Eomer
grasped his sword. ‘That I knew already,’ he muttered.
‘For that reason I would have slain him before, forgetting the law of
the hall. But there are other reasons.’ He stepped forward, but
Gandalf stayed him with his hand.
´
‘Eowyn
is safe now,’ he said. ‘But you, Wormtongue, you have
done what you could for your true master. Some reward you have
earned at least. Yet Saruman is apt to overlook his bargains. I should
advise you to go quickly and remind him, lest he forget your faithful
service.’
‘You lie,’ said Wormtongue.
‘That word comes too oft and easy from your lips,’ said Gandalf.
‘I do not lie. See, Théoden, here is a snake! With safety you cannot
take it with you, nor can you leave it behind. To slay it would be
just. But it was not always as it now is. Once it was a man, and did
you service in its fashion. Give him a horse and let him go at once,
wherever he chooses. By his choice you shall judge him.’
‘Do you hear this, Wormtongue?’ said Théoden. ‘This is your
choice: to ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you
are true; or to go now, whither you will. But then, if ever we meet
again, I shall not be merciful.’
Slowly Wormtongue rose. He looked at them with half-closed eyes.
Last of all he scanned Théoden’s face and opened his mouth as if to
speak. Then suddenly he drew himself up. His hands worked. His
eyes glittered. Such malice was in them that men stepped back from
him. He bared his teeth; and then with a hissing breath he spat before
the king’s feet, and darting to one side, he ﬂed down the stair.

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

521

‘After him!’ said Théoden. ‘See that he does no harm to any, but
do not hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.’
´
‘And if any will bear him,’ said Eomer.
One of the guards ran down the stair. Another went to the well
at the foot of the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he
washed clean the stones that Wormtongue had deﬁled.
‘Now my guests, come!’ said Théoden. ‘Come and take such
refreshment as haste allows.’
They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below
them in the town the heralds crying and the war-horns blowing. For
the king was to ride forth as soon as the men of the town and those
dwelling near could be armed and assembled.
´
At the king’s board sat Eomer
and the four guests, and there also
´
waiting upon the king was the lady Eowyn.
They ate and drank
swiftly. The others were silent while Théoden questioned Gandalf
concerning Saruman.
‘How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?’ said Gandalf.
‘He was not always evil. Once I do not doubt that he was the friend
of Rohan; and even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful
still. But for long now he has plotted your ruin, wearing the mask of
friendship, until he was ready. In those years Wormtongue’s task was
easy, and all that you did was swiftly known in Isengard; for your land
was open, and strangers came and went. And ever Wormtongue’s
whispering was in your ears, poisoning your thought, chilling your
heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and could do
nothing, for your will was in his keeping.
‘But when I escaped and warned you, then the mask was torn, for
those who would see. After that Wormtongue played dangerously,
always seeking to delay you, to prevent your full strength being gathered. He was crafty: dulling men’s wariness, or working on their fears,
as served the occasion. Do you not remember how eagerly he urged
that no man should be spared on a wildgoose chase northward, when
´
the immediate peril was westward? He persuaded you to forbid Eomer
´
to pursue the raiding Orcs. If Eomer
had not deﬁed Wormtongue’s
voice speaking with your mouth, those Orcs would have reached
Isengard by now, bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which
Saruman desires above all else, but at the least two members of my
Company, sharers of a secret hope, of which even to you, lord, I
cannot yet speak openly. Dare you think of what they might now be
suffering, or what Saruman might now have learned to our
destruction?’
´
‘I owe much to Eomer,’
said Théoden. ‘Faithful heart may have
froward tongue.’

522

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Say also,’ said Gandalf, ‘that to crooked eyes truth may wear a
wry face.’
‘Indeed my eyes were almost blind,’ said Théoden. ‘Most of all I
owe to you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would
give you a gift ere we go, at your own choosing. You have only to
name aught that is mine. I reserve now only my sword!’
‘Whether I came in time or not is yet to be seen,’ said Gandalf.
‘But as for your gift, lord, I will choose one that will ﬁt my need:
swift and sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was only lent before, if loan
we may call it. But now I shall ride him into great hazard, setting
silver against black: I would not risk anything that is not my own.
And already there is a bond of love between us.’
‘You choose well,’ said Théoden; ‘and I give him now gladly. Yet
it is a great gift. There is none like to Shadowfax. In him one of the
mighty steeds of old has returned. None such shall return again. And
to you my other guests I will offer such things as may be found in
my armoury. Swords you do not need, but there are helms and coats
of mail of cunning work, gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose
from these ere we go, and may they serve you well!’
Now men came bearing raiment of war from the king’s hoard, and
they arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they
chose, and round shields: their bosses were overlaid with gold and
set with gems, green and red and white. Gandalf took no armour;
and Gimli needed no coat of rings, even if one had been found to
match his stature, for there was no hauberk in the hoards of Edoras
of better make than his short corslet forged beneath the Mountain
in the North. But he chose a cap of iron and leather that ﬁtted well
upon his round head; and a small shield he also took. It bore the
running horse, white upon green, that was the emblem of the House
of Eorl.
‘May it keep you well!’ said Théoden. ‘It was made for me in
Thengel’s day, while still I was a boy.’
Gimli bowed. ‘I am proud, Lord of the Mark, to bear your device,’
he said. ‘Indeed sooner would I bear a horse than be borne by one.
I love my feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand
and ﬁght.’
‘It may well be so,’ said Théoden.
´
The king now rose, and at once Eowyn
came forward bearing
wine. ‘Ferthu Théoden hál!’ she said. ‘Receive now this cup and drink
in happy hour. Health be with thee at thy going and coming!’
Théoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the
guests. As she stood before Aragorn she paused suddenly and looked
upon him, and her eyes were shining. And he looked down upon her

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

523

fair face and smiled; but as he took the cup, his hand met hers, and
he knew that she trembled at the touch. ‘Hail Aragorn son of
Arathorn!’ she said. ‘Hail Lady of Rohan!’ he answered, but his face
now was troubled and he did not smile.
When they had all drunk, the king went down the hall to the doors.
There the guards awaited him, and heralds stood, and all the lords
and chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt
nearby.
‘Behold! I go forth, and it seems like to be my last riding,’ said
´
Théoden. ‘I have no child. Théodred my son is slain. I name Eomer
my sister-son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a
new lord as you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people
that I leave behind, to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?’
No man spoke.
‘Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people
trust?’
‘In the House of Eorl,’ answered Háma.
´
‘But Eomer
I cannot spare, nor would he stay,’ said the king; ‘and
he is the last of that House.’
´
‘I said not Eomer,’
answered Háma. ‘And he is not the last. There
´
´
is Eowyn, daughter of Eomund,
his sister. She is fearless and highhearted. All love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we
are gone.’
‘It shall be so,’ said Théoden. ‘Let the heralds announce to the
´
folk that the Lady Eowyn
will lead them!’
´
Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and Eowyn
knelt
before him and received from him a sword and a fair corslet. ‘Farewell
sister-daughter!’ he said. ‘Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall return
to the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend
themselves, and if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.’
‘Speak not so!’ she answered. ‘A year shall I endure for every day
that passes until your return.’ But as she spoke her eyes went to
Aragorn who stood nearby.
‘The king shall come again,’ he said. ‘Fear not! Not West but East
does our doom await us.’
The king now went down the stair with Gandalf beside him. The
others followed. Aragorn looked back as they passed towards the
´
gate. Alone Eowyn
stood before the doors of the house at the stair’s
head; the sword was set upright before her, and her hands were laid
upon the hilt. She was clad now in mail and shone like silver in the
sun.
Gimli walked with Legolas, his axe on his shoulder. ‘Well, at last
we set off !’ he said. ‘Men need many words before deeds. My axe is

524

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

restless in my hands. Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are
fell-handed when they come to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare
that suits me. How shall I come to the battle? I wish I could walk
and not bump like a sack at Gandalf ’s saddlebow.’
‘A safer seat than many, I guess,’ said Legolas. ‘Yet doubtless
Gandalf will gladly put you down on your feet when blows begin; or
Shadowfax himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.’
‘And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not
shave the scalps of Men,’ said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe.
At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all
ready in the saddle. More than a thousand were there mustered.
Their spears were like a springing wood. Loudly and joyously they
shouted as Théoden came forth. Some held in readiness the king’s
horse, Snowmane, and others held the horses of Aragorn and Legolas.
´
Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, but Eomer
came up to him, leading
his horse.
‘Hail, Gimli Glóin’s son!’ he cried. ‘I have not had time to learn
gentle speech under your rod, as you promised. But shall we not put
aside our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of
the Wood.’
´
´
‘I will forget my wrath for a while, Eomer
son of Eomund,’
said
Gimli; ‘but if ever you chance to see the Lady Galadriel with your
eyes, then you shall acknowledge her the fairest of ladies, or our
friendship will end.’
´
‘So be it!’ said Eomer.
‘But until that time pardon me, and in
token of pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with
the Lord of the Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if
you will.’
‘I thank you indeed,’ said Gimli greatly pleased. ‘I will gladly go
with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.’
´
‘It shall be so,’ said Eomer.
‘Legolas upon my left, and Aragorn
upon my right, and none will dare to stand before us!’
‘Where is Shadowfax?’ said Gandalf.
‘Running wild over the grass,’ they answered. ‘He will let no man
handle him. There he goes, away down by the ford, like a shadow
among the willows.’
Gandalf whistled and called aloud the horse’s name, and far away
he tossed his head and neighed, and turning sped towards the host
like an arrow.
‘Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even
´
so would it appear,’ said Eomer,
as the great horse ran up, until he
stood before the wizard.
‘The gift seems already to be given,’ said Théoden. ‘But hearken
all! Here now I name my guest, Gandalf Greyhame, wisest of counsel-

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN HALL

525

lors, most welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of
the Eorlingas while our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax,
prince of horses.’
‘I thank you, Théoden King,’ said Gandalf. Then suddenly he
threw back his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to
horseback. He wore no helm nor mail. His snowy hair ﬂew free in
the wind, his white robes shone dazzling in the sun.
‘Behold the White Rider!’ cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.
‘Our King and the White Rider!’ they shouted. ‘Forth Eorlingas!’
The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed. Spear
clashed on shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush
like the sudden onset of a great wind the last host of Rohan rode
thundering into the West.
´
Far over the plain Eowyn
saw the glitter of their spears, as she
stood still, alone before the doors of the silent house.

Chapter 7
HELM’S DEEP
The sun was already westering as they rode from Edoras, and the
light of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling ﬁelds of Rohan to
a golden haze. There was a beaten way, north-westward along the
foot-hills of the White Mountains, and this they followed, up and
down in a green country, crossing small swift streams by many fords.
Far ahead and to their right the Misty Mountains loomed; ever darker
and taller they grew as the miles went by. The sun went slowly down
before them. Evening came behind.
The host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late,
they rode with all the speed they could, pausing seldom. Swift and
enduring were the steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to
go. Forty leagues and more it was, as a bird ﬂies, from Edoras to the
fords of the Isen, where they hoped to ﬁnd the king’s men that held
back the hosts of Saruman.
Night closed about them. At last they halted to make their camp.
They had ridden for some ﬁve hours and were far out upon the
western plain, yet more than half their journey lay still before
them. In a great circle, under the starry sky and the waxing moon,
they now made their bivouac. They lit no ﬁres, for they were uncertain of events; but they set a ring of mounted guards about
them, and scouts rode out far ahead, passing like shadows in the
folds of the land. The slow night passed without tidings or alarm.
At dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road
again.
There were no clouds overhead yet, but a heaviness was in the
air; it was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was hazy,
and behind it, following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing
darkness, as of a great storm moving out of the East. And away in
the North-west there seemed to be another darkness brooding about
the feet of the Misty Mountains, a shadow that crept down slowly
from the Wizard’s Vale.
´
Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Eomer.
‘You
have the keen eyes of your fair kindred, Legolas,’ he said; ‘and they
can tell a sparrow from a ﬁnch a league off. Tell me, can you see
anything away yonder towards Isengard?’
‘Many miles lie between,’ said Legolas, gazing thither and shading
his eyes with his long hand. ‘I can see a darkness. There are shapes

HELM’S DEEP

527

moving in it, great shapes far away upon the bank of the river; but
what they are I cannot tell. It is not mist or cloud that defeats my
eyes: there is a veiling shadow that some power lays upon the land,
and it marches slowly down stream. It is as if the twilight under
endless trees were ﬂowing downwards from the hills.’
‘And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,’ said Gandalf. ‘It
will be a black night.’
As the second day of their riding drew on, the heaviness in the air
increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them:
a sombre canopy with great billowing edges ﬂecked with dazzling
light. The sun went down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears
of the Riders were tipped with ﬁre as the last shafts of light kindled
the steep faces of the peaks of Thrihyrne: now very near they stood
on the northernmost arm of the White Mountains, three jagged horns
staring at the sunset. In the last red glow men in the vanguard saw
a black speck, a horseman riding back towards them. They halted
awaiting him.
He came, a weary man with dinted helm and cloven shield. Slowly
he climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At length
´
he spoke. ‘Is Eomer
here?’ he asked. ‘You come at last, but too late,
and with too little strength. Things have gone evilly since Théodred
fell. We were driven back yesterday over the Isen with great loss;
many perished at the crossing. Then at night fresh forces came over
the river against our camp. All Isengard must be emptied; and
Saruman has armed the wild hillmen and herd-folk of Dunland
beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We were overmastered. The shield-wall was broken. Erkenbrand of Westfold has
drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm’s
Deep. The rest are scattered.
´
‘Where is Eomer?
Tell him there is no hope ahead. He should
return to Edoras before the wolves of Isengard come there.’
Théoden had sat silent, hidden from the man’s sight behind his
guards; now he urged his horse forward. ‘Come, stand before me,
Ceorl!’ he said. ‘I am here. The last host of the Eorlingas has ridden
forth. It will not return without battle.’
The man’s face lightened with joy and wonder. He drew himself
up. Then he knelt, offering his notched sword to the king. ‘Command
me, lord!’ he cried. ‘And pardon me! I thought——’
‘You thought I remained in Meduseld bent like an old tree under
winter snow. So it was when you rode to war. But a west wind has
shaken the boughs,’ said Théoden. ‘Give this man a fresh horse! Let
us ride to the help of Erkenbrand!’
*
*
*

528

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

While Théoden was speaking, Gandalf rode a short way ahead,
and he sat there alone, gazing north to Isengard and west to the
setting sun. Now he came back.
‘Ride, Théoden!’ he said. ‘Ride to Helm’s Deep! Go not to the
Fords of Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a
while. Shadowfax must bear me now on a swift errand.’ Turning to
´
Aragorn and Eomer
and the men of the king’s household, he cried:
‘Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till I return. Await me at Helm’s
Gate! Farewell!’
He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow from the bow
the great horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a
ﬂash of silver in the sunset, a wind over the grass, a shadow that ﬂed
and passed from sight. Snowmane snorted and reared, eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the wing could have overtaken him.
‘What does that mean?’ said one of the guard to Háma.
‘That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,’ answered Háma.
‘Ever he goes and comes unlooked-for.’
‘Wormtongue, were he here, would not ﬁnd it hard to explain,’
said the other.
‘True enough,’ said Háma; ‘but for myself, I will wait until I see
Gandalf again.’
‘Maybe you will wait long,’ said the other.
The host turned away now from the road to the Fords of Isen and
bent their course southward. Night fell, and still they rode on. The
hills drew near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim
against the darkening sky. Still some miles away, on the far side of
the Westfold Vale, a great bay in the mountains, lay a green coomb,
out of which a gorge opened in the hills. Men of that land called it
Helm’s Deep, after a hero of old wars who had made his refuge there.
Ever steeper and narrower it wound inward from the north under
the shadow of the Thrihyrne, till the crowhaunted cliffs rose like
mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light.
At Helm’s Gate, before the mouth of the Deep, there was a heel
of rock thrust outward by the northern cliff. There upon its spur
stood high walls of ancient stone, and within them was a lofty tower.
Men said that in the far-off days of the glory of Gondor the sea-kings
had built here this fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg
it was called, for a trumpet sounded upon the tower echoed in the
Deep behind, as if armies long-forgotten were issuing to war from
caves beneath the hills. A wall, too, the men of old had made from
the Hornburg to the southern cliff, barring the entrance to the gorge.
Beneath it by a wide culvert the Deeping-stream passed out. About

HELM’S DEEP

529

the feet of the Hornrock it wound, and ﬂowed then in a gully through
the midst of a wide green gore, sloping gently down from Helm’s
Gate to Helm’s Dike. Thence it fell into the Deeping-coomb and
out into the Westfold Vale. There in the Hornburg at Helm’s Gate
Erkenbrand, master of Westfold on the borders of the Mark, now
dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being wise, he had
repaired the wall and made the fastness strong.
The Riders were still in the low valley before the mouth of the
Coomb, when cries and hornblasts were heard from their scouts that
went in front. Out of the darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout
rode back and reported that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley,
and that a host of Orcs and wild men were hurrying southward from
the Fords of Isen and seemed to be making for Helm’s Deep.
‘We have found many of our folk lying slain as they ﬂed thither,’
said the scout. ‘And we have met scattered companies, going this
way and that, leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand none seem
to know. It is likely that he will be overtaken ere he can reach Helm’s
Gate, if he has not already perished.’
‘Has aught been seen of Gandalf ?’ asked Théoden.
‘Yes, lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a horse,
passing hither and thither over the plains like wind in the grass. Some
thought he was Saruman. It is said that he went away ere nightfall
towards Isengard. Some say also that Wormtongue was seen earlier,
going northward with a company of Orcs.’
‘It will go ill with Wormtongue, if Gandalf comes upon him,’ said
Théoden. ‘Nonetheless I miss now both my counsellors, the old and
the new. But in this need we have no better choice than to go on,
as Gandalf said, to Helm’s Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or
no. Is it known how great is the host that comes from the North?’
‘It is very great,’ said the scout. ‘He that ﬂies counts every foeman
twice, yet I have spoken to stouthearted men, and I do not doubt
that the main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that
we have here.’
´
‘Then let us be swift,’ said Eomer.
‘Let us drive through such foes
as are already between us and the fastness. There are caves in Helm’s
Deep where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up
on to the hills.’
‘Trust not to secret ways,’ said the king. ‘Saruman has long spied
out this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us
go!’
´
Aragorn and Legolas went now with Eomer
in the van. On through
the dark night they rode, ever slower as the darkness deepened and

530

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

their way climbed southward, higher and higher into the dim folds
about the mountains’ feet. They found few of the enemy before them.
Here and there they came upon roving bands of Orcs; but they ﬂed
ere the Riders could take or slay them.
´
‘It will not be long I fear,’ said Eomer,
‘ere the coming of the
king’s host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or
whatever captain he has sent forth.’
The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne
over the dark, the sound of harsh singing. They had climbed far up
into the Deeping-coomb when they looked back. Then they saw
torches, countless points of ﬁery light upon the black ﬁelds behind,
scattered like red ﬂowers, or winding up from the lowlands in long
ﬂickering lines. Here and there a larger blaze leapt up.
‘It is a great host and follows us hard,’ said Aragorn.
‘They bring ﬁre,’ said Théoden, ‘and they are burning as they
come, rick, cot, and tree. This was a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for my folk!’
‘Would that day was here and we might ride down upon them
like a storm out of the mountains!’ said Aragorn. ‘It grieves me to
ﬂy before them.’
´
‘We need not ﬂy much further,’ said Eomer.
‘Not far ahead now
lies Helm’s Dike, an ancient trench and rampart scored across the
coomb, two furlongs below Helm’s Gate. There we can turn and
give battle.’
‘Nay, we are too few to defend the Dike,’ said Théoden. ‘It is a
mile long or more, and the breach in it is wide.’
‘At the breach our rearguard must stand, if we are pressed,’ said
´
Eomer.
There was neither star nor moon when the Riders came to the
breach in the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and
the road beside it ran down from the Hornburg. The rampart loomed
suddenly before them, a high shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode
up a sentinel challenged them.
´
‘The Lord of the Mark rides to Helm’s Gate,’ Eomer
answered.
´
´
‘I, Eomer son of Eomund, speak.’
‘This is good tidings beyond hope,’ said the sentinel. ‘Hasten! The
enemy is on your heels.’
The host passed through the breach and halted on the sloping
sward above. They now learned to their joy that Erkenbrand had left
many men to hold Helm’s Gate, and more had since escaped thither.
‘Maybe, we have a thousand ﬁt to ﬁght on foot,’ said Gamling,
an old man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. ‘But most of
them have seen too many winters, as I have, or too few, as my son’s

HELM’S DEEP

531

son here. What news of Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he
was retreating hither with all that is left of the best Riders of Westfold.
But he has not come.’
´
‘I fear that he will not come now,’ said Eomer.
‘Our scouts have
gained no news of him, and the enemy ﬁlls all the valley behind us.’
‘I would that he had escaped,’ said Théoden. ‘He was a mighty
man. In him lived again the valour of Helm the Hammerhand. But
we cannot await him here. We must draw all our forces now behind
the walls. Are you well stored? We bring little provision, for we rode
forth to open battle, not to a siege.’
‘Behind us in the caves of the Deep are three parts of the folk of
Westfold, old and young, children and women,’ said Gamling. ‘But
great store of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been
gathered there.’
´
‘That is well,’ said Eomer.
‘They are burning or despoiling all that
is left in the vale.’
‘If they come to bargain for our goods at Helm’s Gate, they will
pay a high price,’ said Gamling.
The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed
the stream they dismounted. In a long ﬁle they led their horses up
the ramp and passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they
were welcomed again with joy and renewed hope; for now there were
men enough to man both the burg and the barrier wall.
´
Quickly Eomer
set his men in readiness. The king and the men
of his household were in the Hornburg, and there also were many of
the Westfold-men. But on the Deeping Wall and its tower, and behind
´
it, Eomer
arrayed most of the strength that he had, for here the
defence seemed more doubtful, if the assault were determined and
in great force. The horses were led far up the Deep under such guard
as could be spared.
The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four
men could walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet over
which only a tall man could look. Here and there were clefts in the
stone through which men could shoot. This battlement could be
reached by a stair running down from a door in the outer court of
the Hornburg; three ﬂights of steps led also up on to the wall from
the Deep behind; but in front it was smooth, and the great stones of
it were set with such skill that no foothold could be found at their
joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea-delved cliff.
Gimli stood leaning against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas
sat above on the parapet, ﬁngering his bow, and peering out into the
gloom.

532

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘This is more to my liking,’ said the dwarf, stamping on the stones.
‘Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good
rock here. This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as
we came up from the dike. Give me a year and a hundred of my kin
and I would make this a place that armies would break upon like
water.’
‘I do not doubt it,’ said Legolas. ‘But you are a dwarf, and dwarves
are strange folk. I do not like this place, and I shall like it no more
by the light of day. But you comfort me, Gimli, and I am glad to
have you standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I
wish there were more of your kin among us. But even more would
I give for a hundred good archers of Mirkwood. We shall need them.
The Rohirrim have good bowmen after their fashion, but there are
too few here, too few.’
‘It is dark for archery,’ said Gimli. ‘Indeed it is time for sleep.
Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never I thought any dwarf could. Riding
is tiring work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give me a row of
orc-necks and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!’
A slow time passed. Far down in the valley scattered ﬁres still
burned. The hosts of Isengard were advancing in silence now. Their
torches could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.
Suddenly from the Dike yells and screams, and the ﬁerce battlecries of men broke out. Flaming brands appeared over the brink and
clustered thickly at the breach. Then they scattered and vanished.
Men came galloping back over the ﬁeld and up the ramp to the gate
of the Hornburg. The rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven
in.
‘The enemy is at hand!’ they said. ‘We loosed every arrow that
we had, and ﬁlled the Dike with Orcs. But it will not halt them long.
Already they are scaling the bank at many points, thick as marching
ants. But we have taught them not to carry torches.’
It was now past midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the
stillness of the heavy air foreboded storm. Suddenly the clouds were
seared by a blinding ﬂash. Branched lightning smote down upon the
eastward hills. For a staring moment the watchers on the walls saw
all the space between them and the Dike lit with white light: it was
boiling and crawling with black shapes, some squat and broad, some
tall and grim, with high helms and sable shields. Hundreds and hundreds more were pouring over the Dike and through the breach. The
dark tide ﬂowed up to the walls from cliff to cliff. Thunder rolled in
the valley. Rain came lashing down.
Arrows thick as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and

HELM’S DEEP

533

fell clinking and glancing on the stones. Some found a mark. The
assault on Helm’s Deep had begun, but no sound or challenge was
heard within; no answering arrows came.
The assailing hosts halted, foiled by the silent menace of rock and
wall. Ever and again the lightning tore aside the darkness. Then the
Orcs screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of
arrows at any that stood revealed upon the battlements; and the men
of the Mark amazed looked out, as it seemed to them, upon a great
ﬁeld of dark corn, tossed by a tempest of war, and every ear glinted
with barbed light.
Brazen trumpets sounded. The enemy surged forward, some
against the Deeping Wall, others towards the causeway and the ramp
that led up to the Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Orcs were
mustered, and the wild men of the Dunland fells. A moment they
hesitated and then on they came. The lightning ﬂashed, and blazoned
upon every helm and shield the ghastly hand of Isengard was seen.
They reached the summit of the rock; they drove towards the
gates.
Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them, and a
hail of stones. They wavered, broke, and ﬂed back; and then charged
again, broke and charged again; and each time, like the incoming
sea, they halted at a higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press
of roaring men leaped forth. They held their great shields above them
like a roof, while in their midst they bore two trunks of mighty trees.
Behind them orc-archers crowded, sending a hail of darts against the
bowmen on the walls. They gained the gates. The trees, swung by
strong arms, smote the timbers with a rending boom. If any man fell,
crushed by a stone hurtling from above, two others sprang to take
his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed.
Éomer and Aragorn stood together on the Deeping Wall. They
heard the roar of voices and the thudding of the rams; and then in
a sudden ﬂash of light they beheld the peril of the gates.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘This is the hour when we draw swords
together!’
Running like ﬁre, they sped along the wall, and up the steps, and
passed into the outer court upon the Rock. As they ran they gathered
a handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that
opened in an angle of the burg-wall on the west, where the cliff
stretched out to meet it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards
the great gate, between the wall and the sheer brink of the Rock.
´
Together Eomer
and Aragorn sprang through the door, their men
close behind. The two swords ﬂashed from the sheath as one.
´
‘Gúthwinë!’ cried Eomer.
‘Gúthwinë for the Mark!’
‘Andúril!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Andúril for the Dúnedain!’

534

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Charging from the side, they hurled themselves upon the wild
men. Andúril rose and fell, gleaming with white ﬁre. A shout went
up from wall and tower: ‘Andúril! Andúril goes to war. The Blade
that was Broken shines again!’
Dismayed the rammers let fall the trees and turned to ﬁght; but
the wall of their shields was broken as by a lightning-stroke, and they
were swept away, hewn down, or cast over the Rock into the stony
stream below. The orc-archers shot wildly and then ﬂed.
´
For a moment Eomer
and Aragorn halted before the gates. The
thunder was rumbling in the distance now. The lightning ﬂickered
still, far off among the mountains in the South. A keen wind was
blowing from the North again. The clouds were torn and drifting,
and stars peeped out; and above the hills of the Coomb-side the
westering moon rode, glimmering yellow in the storm-wrack.
‘We did not come too soon,’ said Aragorn, looking at the gates.
Their great hinges and iron bars were wrenched and bent; many of
their timbers were cracked. ‘The doors will not withstand another
such battering.’
‘Yet we cannot stay here beyond the walls to defend them,’ said
´
Eomer.
‘Look!’ He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press
of Orcs and Men were gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows
whined, and skipped on the stones about them. ‘Come! We must get
back and see what we can do to pile stone and beam across the gates
within. Come now!’
They turned and ran. At that moment some dozen Orcs that had
lain motionless among the slain leaped to their feet, and came silently
´
and swiftly behind. Two ﬂung themselves to the ground at Eomer’s
heels, tripped him, and in a moment they were on top of him. But
a small dark ﬁgure that none had observed sprang out of the shadows
and gave a hoarse shout: Baruk Khazâd! Khazâd ai-mênu! An axe
swung and swept back. Two Orcs fell headless. The rest ﬂed.
Éomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid.
The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled
´
inside with stones. When all were safe within, Eomer
turned: ‘I thank
you, Gimli son of Glóin!’ he said. ‘I did not know that you were with
us in the sortie. But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company.
How came you there?’
‘I followed you to shake off sleep,’ said Gimli; ‘but I looked on
the hillmen and they seemed over large for me, so I sat beside a stone
to see your sword-play.’
´
‘I shall not ﬁnd it easy to repay you,’ said Eomer.
‘There may be many a chance ere the night is over,’ laughed the

HELM’S DEEP

535

Dwarf. ‘But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood
since I left Moria.’
‘Two!’ said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place
on the wall.
‘Two?’ said Legolas. ‘I have done better, though now I must grope
for spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at
the least. But that is only a few leaves in a forest.’
The sky now was quickly clearing and the sinking moon was shining brightly. But the light brought little hope to the Riders of the
Mark. The enemy before them seemed to have grown rather than
diminished, and still more were pressing up from the valley through
the breach. The sortie upon the Rock gained only a brief respite.
The assault on the gates was redoubled. Against the Deeping Wall
the hosts of Isengard roared like a sea. Orcs and hillmen swarmed
about its feet from end to end. Ropes with grappling hooks were
hurled over the parapet faster than men could cut them or ﬂing them
back. Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down
in ruin, but many more replaced them, and Orcs sprang up them
like apes in the dark forests of the South. Before the wall’s foot the
dead and broken were piled like shingle in a storm; ever higher rose
the hideous mounds, and still the enemy came on.
The men of Rohan grew weary. All their arrows were spent, and
every shaft was shot; their swords were notched, and their shields
´
were riven. Three times Aragorn and Eomer
rallied them, and three
times Andúril ﬂamed in a desperate charge that drove the enemy
from the wall.
Then a clamour arose in the Deep behind. Orcs had crept like
rats through the culvert through which the stream ﬂowed out. There
they had gathered in the shadow of the cliffs, until the assault above
was hottest and nearly all the men of the defence had rushed to the
wall’s top. Then they sprang out. Already some had passed into the
jaws of the Deep and were among the horses, ﬁghting with the guards.
Down from the wall leapt Gimli with a ﬁerce cry that echoed in
the cliffs. ‘Khazâd! Khazâd!’ He soon had work enough.
‘Ai-oi!’ he shouted. ‘The Orcs are behind the wall. Ai-oi! Come,
Legolas! There are enough for us both. Khazâd ai-mênu!’
Gamling the Old looked down from the Hornburg, hearing the
great voice of the dwarf above all the tumult. ‘The Orcs are in the Deep!’
he cried. ‘Helm! Helm! Forth Helmingas!’ he shouted as he leaped
down the stair from the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back.
Their onset was ﬁerce and sudden, and the Orcs gave way before

536

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

them. Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge,
and all were slain or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to
fall before the guardians of the hidden caves.
‘Twenty-one!’ cried Gimli. He hewed a two-handed stroke and
laid the last Orc before his feet. ‘Now my count passes Master Legolas
again.’
‘We must stop this rat-hole,’ said Gamling. ‘Dwarves are said to
be cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!’
‘We do not shape stone with battle-axes, nor with our ﬁnger-nails,’
said Gimli. ‘But I will help as I may.’
They gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they
could ﬁnd to hand, and under Gimli’s direction the Westfold-men
blocked up the inner end of the culvert, until only a narrow outlet
remained. Then the Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned
and fretted in its choked path, and spread slowly in cold pools from
cliff to cliff.
‘It will be drier above,’ said Gimli. ‘Come, Gamling, let us see
how things go on the wall!’
´
He climbed up and found Legolas beside Aragorn and Eomer.
The elf was whetting his long knife. There was for a while a lull in
the assault, since the attempt to break in through the culvert had
been foiled.
‘Twenty-one!’ said Gimli.
‘Good!’ said Legolas. ‘But my count is now two dozen. It has been
knife-work up here.’
Éomer and Aragorn leant wearily on their swords. Away on the
left the crash and clamour of the battle on the Rock rose loud again.
But the Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea. Its gates
lay in ruin; but over the barricade of beams and stones within no
enemy as yet had passed.
Aragorn looked at the pale stars, and at the moon, now sloping
behind the western hills that enclosed the valley. ‘This is a night as
long as years,’ he said. ‘How long will the day tarry?’
‘Dawn is not far off,’ said Gamling, who had now climbed up
beside him. ‘But dawn will not help us, I fear.’
‘Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,’ said Aragorn.
‘But these creatures of Isengard, these half-orcs and goblin-men
that the foul craft of Saruman has bred, they will not quail at the
sun,’ said Gamling. ‘And neither will the wild men of the hills. Do
you not hear their voices?’
´
‘I hear them,’ said Eomer;
‘but they are only the scream of birds
and the bellowing of beasts to my ears.’
‘Yet there are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,’ said Gamling.

HELM’S DEEP

537

‘I know that tongue. It is an ancient speech of men, and once was
spoken in many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us,
and they are glad; for our doom seems certain to them. ‘‘The king,
the king!’’ they cry. ‘‘We will take their king. Death to the Forgoil!
Death to the Strawheads! Death to the robbers of the North!’’ Such
names they have for us. Not in half a thousand years have they
forgotten their grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the Mark to
Eorl the Young and made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman
has inﬂamed. They are ﬁerce folk when roused. They will not give
way now for dusk or dawn, until Théoden is taken, or they themselves
are slain.’
‘Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,’ said Aragorn. ‘Is it not
said that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it?’
´
‘So the minstrels say,’ said Eomer.
‘Then let us defend it, and hope!’ said Aragorn.
Even as they spoke there came a blare of trumpets. Then there
was a crash and a ﬂash of ﬂame and smoke. The waters of the
Deeping-stream poured out hissing and foaming: they were choked
no longer, a gaping hole was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes
poured in.
‘Devilry of Saruman!’ cried Aragorn. ‘They have crept in the culvert again, while we talked, and they have lit the ﬁre of Orthanc
beneath our feet. Elendil, Elendil!’ he shouted, as he leaped down into
the breach; but even as he did so a hundred ladders were raised
against the battlements. Over the wall and under the wall the last
assault came sweeping like a dark wave upon a hill of sand. The
defence was swept away. Some of the Riders were driven back, further
and further into the Deep, falling and ﬁghting as they gave way, step
by step, towards the caves. Others cut their way back towards the
citadel.
A broad stairway climbed from the Deep up to the Rock and the
rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood Aragorn. In his
hand still Andúril gleamed, and the terror of the sword for a while
held back the enemy, as one by one all who could gain the stair
passed up towards the gate. Behind on the upper steps knelt Legolas.
His bow was bent, but one gleaned arrow was all that he had left,
and he peered out now, ready to shoot the ﬁrst Orc that should dare
to approach the stair.
‘All who can have now got safe within, Aragorn,’ he called. ‘Come
back!’
Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as he ran he stumbled
in his weariness. At once his enemies leapt forward. Up came the
Orcs, yelling, with their long arms stretched out to seize him. The

538

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

foremost fell with Legolas’ last arrow in his throat, but the rest sprang
over him. Then a great boulder, cast from the outer wall above,
crashed down upon the stair, and hurled them back into the Deep.
Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it clanged to behind him.
‘Things go ill, my friends,’ he said, wiping the sweat from his brow
with his arm.
‘Ill enough,’ said Legolas, ‘but not yet hopeless, while we have
you with us. Where is Gimli?’
‘I do not know,’ said Aragorn. ‘I last saw him ﬁghting on the
ground behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.’
‘Alas! That is evil news,’ said Legolas.
‘He is stout and strong,’ said Aragorn. ‘Let us hope that he will
escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer
than we. Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.’
‘That must be my hope,’ said Legolas. ‘But I wish that he had
come this way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now
thirty-nine.’
‘If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your count again,’
laughed Aragorn. ‘Never did I see an axe so wielded.’
‘I must go and seek some arrows,’ said Legolas. ‘Would that this
night would end, and I could have better light for shooting.’
Aragorn now passed into the citadel. There to his dismay he
´
learned that Eomer
had not reached the Hornburg.
‘Nay, he did not come to the Rock,’ said one of the Westfold-men.
‘I last saw him gathering men about him and ﬁghting in the mouth
of the Deep. Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not
come to them.’
Aragorn strode on through the inner court, and mounted to a high
chamber in the tower. There stood the king, dark against a narrow
window, looking out upon the vale.
‘What is the news, Aragorn?’ he said.
‘The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and all the defence swept away;
but many have escaped hither to the Rock.’
´
‘Is Eomer
here?’
‘No, lord. But many of your men retreated into the Deep; and
´
some say that Eomer
was amongst them. In the narrows they may
hold back the enemy and come within the caves. What hope they
may have then I do not know.’
‘More than we. Good provision, it is said. And the air is wholesome
there because of the outlets through ﬁssures in the rock far above.
None can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold
out long.’
‘But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc,’ said Aragorn.

HELM’S DEEP

539

‘They have a blasting ﬁre, and with it they took the Wall. If they
cannot come in the caves, they may seal up those that are inside. But
now we must turn all our thought to our own defence.’
‘I fret in this prison,’ said Théoden. ‘If I could have set a spear in
rest, riding before my men upon the ﬁeld, maybe I could have felt
again the joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.’
‘Here at least you are guarded in the strongest fastness of the
Mark,’ said Aragorn. ‘More hope we have to defend you in the
Hornburg than in Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.’
‘It is said that the Hornburg has never fallen to assault,’ said
Théoden; ‘but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and
all that once was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower
withstand such numbers and such reckless hate? Had I known that
the strength of Isengard was grown so great, maybe I should not so
rashly have ridden forth to meet it, for all the arts of Gandalf. His
counsel seems not now so good as it did under the morning sun.’
‘Do not judge the counsel of Gandalf, until all is over, lord,’ said
Aragorn.
‘The end will not be long,’ said the king. ‘But I will not end here,
taken like an old badger in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel and the
horses of my guard are in the inner court. When dawn comes, I will
bid men sound Helm’s horn, and I will ride forth. Will you ride with
me then, son of Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make
such an end as will be worth a song – if any be left to sing of us
hereafter.’
‘I will ride with you,’ said Aragorn.
Taking his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all
their circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the
assault was hot. Legolas went with him. Blasts of ﬁre leaped up from
below shaking the stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders
raised. Again and again the Orcs gained the summit of the outer wall,
and again the defenders cast them down.
At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless of the darts
of the enemy. As he looked forth he saw the eastern sky grow pale.
Then he raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley.
The Orcs yelled and jeered. ‘Come down! Come down!’ they cried.
‘If you wish to speak to us, come down! Bring out your king! We are
the ﬁghting Uruk-hai. We will fetch him from his hole, if he does
not come. Bring out your skulking king!’
‘The king stays or comes at his own will,’ said Aragorn.
‘Then what are you doing here?’ they answered. ‘Why do you look
out? Do you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the ﬁghting
Uruk-hai.’

540

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I looked out to see the dawn,’ said Aragorn.
‘What of the dawn?’ they jeered. ‘We are the Uruk-hai: we do not
stop the ﬁght for night or day, for fair weather or for storm. We come
to kill, by sun or moon. What of the dawn?’
‘None knows what the new day shall bring him,’ said Aragorn.
‘Get you gone, ere it turn to your evil.’
‘Get down or we will shoot you from the wall,’ they cried. ‘This
is no parley. You have nothing to say.’
‘I have still this to say,’ answered Aragorn. ‘No enemy has yet
taken the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not
one will be left alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not
know your peril.’
So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood
there alone above the ruined gates before the host of his enemies, that
many of the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to
the valley, and some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Orcs
laughed with loud voices; and a hail of darts and arrows whistled
over the wall, as Aragorn leaped down.
There was a roar and a blast of ﬁre. The archway of the gate above
which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed in smoke
and dust. The barricade was scattered as if by a thunderbolt. Aragorn
ran to the king’s tower.
But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs about it yelled, preparing
to charge, a murmur arose behind them, like a wind in the distance,
and it grew to a clamour of many voices crying strange news in the
dawn. The Orcs upon the Rock, hearing the rumour of dismay,
wavered and looked back. And then, sudden and terrible, from the
tower above, the sound of the great horn of Helm rang out.
All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Orcs cast themselves on their faces and covered their ears with their claws. Back
from the Deep the echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff
and hill a mighty herald stood. But on the walls men looked up,
listening with wonder; for the echoes did not die. Ever the hornblasts
wound on among the hills; nearer now and louder they answered
one to another, blowing ﬁerce and free.
‘Helm! Helm!’ the Riders shouted. ‘Helm is arisen and comes
back to war. Helm for Théoden King!’
And with that shout the king came. His horse was white as snow,
golden was his shield, and his spear was long. At his right hand was
Aragorn, Elendil’s heir, behind him rode the lords of the House of
Eorl the Young. Light sprang in the sky. Night departed.
‘Forth Eorlingas!’ With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down
from the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they

HELM’S DEEP

541

drove through the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind
them from the Deep came the stern cries of men issuing from the
caves, driving forth the enemy. Out poured all the men that were left
upon the Rock. And ever the sound of blowing horns echoed in the
hills.
On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains and champions fell or ﬂed before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them.
Their backs were to the swords and spears of the Riders, and their
faces to the valley. They cried and wailed, for fear and great wonder
had come upon them with the rising of the day.
So King Théoden rode from Helm’s Gate and clove his path to
the great Dike. There the company halted. Light grew bright about
them. Shafts of the sun ﬂared above the eastern hills and glimmered
on their spears. But they sat silent on their horses, and they gazed
down upon the Deeping-coomb.
The land had changed. Where before the green dale had lain, its
grassy slopes lapping the ever-mounting hills, there now a forest
loomed. Great trees, bare and silent, stood, rank on rank, with tangled
bough and hoary head; their twisted roots were buried in the long
green grass. Darkness was under them. Between the Dike and the
eaves of that nameless wood only two open furlongs lay. There now
cowered the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror of the king and in
terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm’s Gate until all
above the Dike was empty of them, but below it they were packed
like swarming ﬂies. Vainly they crawled and clambered about the
walls of the coomb, seeking to escape. Upon the east too sheer and
stony was the valley’s side; upon the left, from the west, their ﬁnal
doom approached.
There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white,
shining in the rising sun. Over the low hills the horns were sounding.
Behind him, hastening down the long slopes, were a thousand men
on foot; their swords were in their hands. Amid them strode a man
tall and strong. His shield was red. As he came to the valley’s brink,
he set to his lips a great black horn and blew a ringing blast.
‘Erkenbrand!’ the Riders shouted. ‘Erkenbrand!’
‘Behold the White Rider!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Gandalf is come again!’
‘Mithrandir, Mithrandir!’ said Legolas. ‘This is wizardry indeed!
Come! I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.’
The hosts of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning
from fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down
through the breach of the Dike charged the king’s company. Down
from the hills leaped Erkenbrand, lord of Westfold. Down leaped

542

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Shadowfax, like a deer that runs surefooted in the mountains. The
White Rider was upon them, and the terror of his coming ﬁlled the
enemy with madness. The wild men fell on their faces before him.
The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and spear.
Like a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they ﬂed. Wailing
they passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that
shadow none ever came again.

Chapter 8
THE ROAD TO ISENGARD
So it was that in the light of a fair morning King Théoden and
Gandalf the White Rider met again upon the green grass beside the
Deeping-stream. There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and
Legolas the Elf, and Erkenbrand of Westfold, and the lords of the
Golden House. About them were gathered the Rohirrim, the Riders
of the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and their eyes
were turned towards the wood.
Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came
those who had been driven back into the Deep. There came Gamling
´
´
the Old, and Eomer
son of Eomund,
and beside them walked Gimli
the dwarf. He had no helm, and about his head was a linen band
stained with blood; but his voice was loud and strong.
‘Forty-two, Master Legolas!’ he cried. ‘Alas! My axe is notched:
the forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?’
‘You have passed my score by one,’ answered Legolas. ‘But I do
not grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!’
´
‘Welcome, Eomer,
sister-son!’ said Théoden. ‘Now that I see you
safe, I am glad indeed.’
´
‘Hail, Lord of the Mark!’ said Eomer.
‘The dark night has passed,
and day has come again. But the day has brought strange tidings.’
He turned and gazed in wonder, ﬁrst at the wood and then at Gandalf.
‘Once more you come in the hour of need, unlooked-for,’ he said.
‘Unlooked-for?’ said Gandalf. ‘I said that I would return and meet
you here.’
‘But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your
coming. Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf
the White!’
‘That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given
good counsel in peril, and made use of the speed of Shadowfax. Your
own valour has done more, and the stout legs of the Westfold-men
marching through the night.’
Then they all gazed at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some
glanced darkly at the wood, and passed their hands over their brows,
as if they thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.
Gandalf laughed long and merrily. ‘The trees?’ he said. ‘Nay, I
see the wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is
a thing beyond the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and
better even than my hope the event has proved.’

544

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Then if not yours, whose is the wizardry?’ said Théoden. ‘Not
Saruman’s, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of whom we
have yet to learn?’
‘It is not wizardry, but a power far older,’ said Gandalf: ‘a power
that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang.
Ere iron was found or tree was hewn,
When young was mountain under moon;
Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe,
It walked the forests long ago.’
‘And what may be the answer to your riddle?’ said Théoden.
‘If you would learn that, you should come with me to Isengard,’
answered Gandalf.
‘To Isengard?’ they cried.
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I shall return to Isengard, and those who will
may come with me. There we may see strange things.’
‘But there are not men enough in the Mark, not if they were all
gathered together and healed of wounds and weariness, to assault
the stronghold of Saruman,’ said Théoden.
‘Nevertheless to Isengard I go,’ said Gandalf. ‘I shall not stay there
long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the
waning of the moon!’
‘Nay!’ said Théoden. ‘In the dark hour before dawn I doubted,
but we will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.’
‘I wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be now,’ said
Gandalf, ‘and since he has done you great injury, it would be ﬁtting
if you were there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?’
‘My men are weary with battle,’ said the King; ‘and I am weary
also. For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My old age is not
feigned nor due only to the whisperings of Wormtongue. It is an ill
that no leech can wholly cure, not even Gandalf.’
‘Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,’ said Gandalf. ‘We
will journey under the shadow of evening. It is as well; for it is my
counsel that all our comings and goings should be as secret as may
be, henceforth. But do not command many men to go with you,
Théoden. We go to a parley not to a ﬁght.’
The King then chose men that were unhurt and had swift horses,
and he sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of
the Mark; and they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young
and old, to come in haste to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark
would hold an assembly of all that could bear arms, on the third day
after the full moon. To ride with him to Isengard the King chose
´
Eomer
and twenty men of his household. With Gandalf would go

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

545

Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite of his hurt the dwarf would
not stay behind.
‘It was only a feeble blow and the cap turned it,’ he said. ‘It would
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.’
‘I will tend it, while you rest,’ said Aragorn.
The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep
of quiet as he had not known for many years, and the remainder of
his chosen company rested also. But the others, all that were not
hurt or wounded, began a great labour; for many had fallen in the
battle and lay dead upon the ﬁeld or in the Deep.
No Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But a great
many of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid,
and cried for mercy.
The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set
them to work.
‘Help now to repair the evil in which you have joined,’ said Erkenbrand; ‘and afterwards you shall take an oath never again to pass the
Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march with the enemies of Men; and
then you shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded
by Saruman. Many of you have got death as the reward of your trust
in him; but had you conquered, little better would your wages have
been.’
The men of Dunland were amazed; for Saruman had told them
that the men of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive.
In the midst of the ﬁeld before the Hornburg two mounds were
raised, and beneath them were laid all the Riders of the Mark who
fell in the defence, those of the East Dales upon one side, and those
of Westfold upon the other. But the men of Dunland were set apart
in a mound below the Dike. In a grave alone under the shadow of
the Hornburg lay Háma, captain of the King’s guard. He fell before
the Gate.
The Orcs were piled in great heaps, away from the mounds of
Men, not far from the eaves of the forest. And the people were
troubled in their minds; for the heaps of carrion were too great for
burial or for burning. They had little wood for ﬁring, and none would
have dared to take an axe to the strange trees, even if Gandalf had
not warned them to hurt neither bark nor bough at their great peril.
‘Let the Orcs lie,’ said Gandalf. ‘The morning may bring new
counsel.’
In the afternoon the King’s company prepared to depart. The
work of burial was then but beginning; and Théoden mourned for
the loss of Háma, his captain, and cast the ﬁrst earth upon his grave.

546

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Great injury indeed has Saruman done to me and all this land,’ he
said; ‘and I will remember it, when we meet.’
The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west of the
Coomb, when at last Théoden and Gandalf and their companions
rode down from the Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host,
both of the Riders and of the people of Westfold, old and young,
women and children, who had come out from the caves. A song of
victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell silent, wondering
what would chance, for their eyes were on the trees and they feared
them.
The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and man,
they were unwilling to pass in. The trees were grey and menacing,
and a shadow or a mist was about them. The ends of their long
sweeping boughs hung down like searching ﬁngers, their roots stood
up from the ground like the limbs of strange monsters, and dark
caverns opened beneath them. But Gandalf went forward, leading
the company, and where the road from the Hornburg met the trees
they saw now an opening like an arched gate under mighty boughs;
and through it Gandalf passed, and they followed him. Then to their
amazement they found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream
beside it; and the sky was open above and full of golden light. But
on either side the great aisles of the wood were already wrapped in
dusk, stretching away into impenetrable shadows; and there they
heard the creaking and groaning of boughs, and far cries, and a
rumour of wordless voices, murmuring angrily. No Orc or other living
creature could be seen.
Legolas and Gimli were now riding together upon one horse; and
they kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood.
‘It is hot in here,’ said Legolas to Gandalf. ‘I feel a great wrath
about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf.
‘What has become of the miserable Orcs?’ said Legolas.
‘That, I think, no one will ever know,’ said Gandalf.
They rode in silence for a while; but Legolas was ever glancing
from side to side, and would often have halted to listen to the sounds
of the wood, if Gimli had allowed it.
‘These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,’ he said; ‘and I have
seen many an oak grow from acorn to ruinous age. I wish that there
were leisure now to walk among them: they have voices, and in time
I might come to understand their thought.’
‘No, no!’ said Gimli. ‘Let us leave them! I guess their thought
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their speech is of
crushing and strangling.’

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

547

‘Not of all that go on two legs,’ said Legolas. ‘There I think you
are wrong. It is Orcs that they hate. For they do not belong here and
know little of Elves and Men. Far away are the valleys where they
sprang. From the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they
come, I guess.’
‘Then that is the most perilous wood in Middle-earth,’ said Gimli.
‘I should be grateful for the part they have played, but I do not love
them. You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater
wonder in this land, more beautiful than any grove or glade that ever
grew: my heart is still full of it.
‘Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the
marvels of the Northern World, and what do they say of it? Caves,
they say! Caves! Holes to ﬂy to in time of war, to store fodder in!
My good Legolas, do you know that the caverns of Helm’s Deep are
vast and beautiful? There would be an endless pilgrimage of Dwarves,
merely to gaze at them, if such things were known to be. Aye indeed,
they would pay pure gold for a brief glance!’
‘And I would give gold to be excused,’ said Legolas; ‘and double
to be let out, if I strayed in!’
‘You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,’ said Gimli. ‘But you
speak like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King
dwells under the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their
making long ago? They are but hovels compared with the caverns I
have seen here: immeasurable halls, ﬁlled with an everlasting music of
water that tinkles into pools, as fair as Kheled-zâram in the starlight.
‘And, Legolas, when the torches are kindled and men walk on the
sandy ﬂoors under the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas, gems and
crystals and veins of precious ore glint in the polished walls; and the
light glows through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living
hands of Queen Galadriel. There are columns of white and saffron
and dawn-rose, Legolas, ﬂuted and twisted into dreamlike forms;
they spring up from many-coloured ﬂoors to meet the glistening
pendants of the roof: wings, ropes, curtains ﬁne as frozen clouds;
spears, banners, pinnacles of suspended palaces! Still lakes mirror
them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered with clear
glass; cities, such as the mind of Durin could scarce have imagined in
his sleep, stretch on through avenues and pillared courts, on into the
dark recesses where no light can come. And plink! a silver drop falls,
and the round wrinkles in the glass make all the towers bend and
waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening
comes: they fade and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another
chamber and another dream. There is chamber after chamber,
Legolas; hall opening out of hall, dome after dome, stair beyond stair;
and still the winding paths lead on into the mountains’ heart. Caves!

548

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The Caverns of Helm’s Deep! Happy was the chance that drove me
there! It makes me weep to leave them.’
‘Then I will wish you this fortune for your comfort, Gimli,’ said
the Elf, ‘that you may come safe from war and return to see them
again. But do not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for
them to do, from your account. Maybe the men of this land are wise
to say little: one family of busy dwarves with hammer and chisel
might mar more than they made.’
‘No, you do not understand,’ said Gimli. ‘No dwarf could be
unmoved by such loveliness. None of Durin’s race would mine those
caves for stones or ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there.
Do you cut down groves of blossoming trees in the springtime for
ﬁrewood? We would tend these glades of ﬂowering stone, not quarry
them. With cautious skill, tap by tap – a small chip of rock and no
more, perhaps, in a whole anxious day – so we could work, and as
the years went by, we should open up new ways, and display far
chambers that are still dark, glimpsed only as a void beyond ﬁssures
in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps
as once shone in Khazad-dûm; and when we wished we would drive
away the night that has lain there since the hills were made; and
when we desired rest, we would let the night return.’
‘You move me, Gimli,’ said Legolas. ‘I have never heard you speak
like this before. Almost you make me regret that I have not seen
these caves. Come! Let us make this bargain – if we both return safe
out of the perils that await us, we will journey for a while together.
You shall visit Fangorn with me, and then I will come with you to
see Helm’s Deep.’
‘That would not be the way of return that I should choose,’ said
Gimli. ‘But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come
back to the caves and share their wonder with me.’
‘You have my promise,’ said Legolas. ‘But alas! Now we must
leave behind both cave and wood for a while. See! We are coming
to the end of the trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf ?’
‘About ﬁfteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it,’ said
Gandalf: ‘ﬁve from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to the Fords; and
ten more from there to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride
all the way this night.’
‘And when we come there, what shall we see?’ asked Gimli. ‘You
may know, but I cannot guess.’
‘I do not know myself for certain,’ answered the wizard. ‘I was
there at nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet
I think that you will not say that the journey was in vain – not though
the Glittering Caves of Aglarond be left behind.’
*
*
*

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

549

At last the company passed through the trees, and found that they
had come to the bottom of the Coomb, where the road from Helm’s
Deep branched, going one way east to Edoras, and the other north to
the Fords of Isen. As they rode from under the eaves of the wood,
Legolas halted and looked back with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry.
‘There are eyes!’ he said. ‘Eyes looking out from the shadows of
the boughs! I never saw such eyes before.’
The others, surprised by his cry, halted and turned; but Legolas
started to ride back.
‘No, no!’ cried Gimli. ‘Do as you please in your madness, but let
me ﬁrst get down from this horse! I wish to see no eyes!’
‘Stay, Legolas Greenleaf !’ said Gandalf. ‘Do not go back into the
wood, not yet! Now is not your time.’
Even as he spoke, there came forward out of the trees three strange
shapes. As tall as trolls they were, twelve feet or more in height; their
strong bodies, stout as young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment
or with hide of close-ﬁtting grey and brown. Their limbs were long,
and their hands had many ﬁngers; their hair was stiff, and their beards
grey-green as moss. They gazed out with solemn eyes, but they were
not looking at the riders: their eyes were bent northwards. Suddenly
they lifted their long hands to their mouths, and sent forth ringing
calls, clear as notes of a horn, but more musical and various. The
calls were answered; and turning again, the riders saw other creatures
of the same kind approaching, striding through the grass. They came
swiftly from the North, walking like wading herons in their gait, but
not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat quicker than
the heron’s wings. The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some set
their hands upon their sword-hilts.
‘You need no weapons,’ said Gandalf. ‘These are but herdsmen.
They are not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.’
So it seemed to be; for as he spoke the tall creatures, without a
glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished.
‘Herdsmen!’ said Théoden. ‘Where are their ﬂocks? What are they,
Gandalf ? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.’
‘They are the shepherds of the trees,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Is it so
long since you listened to tales by the ﬁreside? There are children in
your land who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the
answer to your question. You have seen Ents, O King, Ents out of
Fangorn Forest, which in your tongue you call the Entwood. Did
you think that the name was given only in idle fancy? Nay, Théoden,
it is otherwise: to them you are but the passing tale; all the years
from Eorl the Young to Théoden the Old are of little count to them;
and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.’
The king was silent. ‘Ents!’ he said at length. ‘Out of the shadows

550

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

of legend I begin a little to understand the marvel of the trees, I
think. I have lived to see strange days. Long we have tended our
beasts and our ﬁelds, built our houses, wrought our tools, or ridden
away to help in the wars of Minas Tirith. And that we called the life
of Men, the way of the world. We cared little for what lay beyond
the borders of our land. Songs we have that tell of these things, but
we are forgetting them, teaching them only to children, as a careless
custom. And now the songs have come down among us out of strange
places, and walk visible under the Sun.’
‘You should be glad, Théoden King,’ said Gandalf. ‘For not only
the little life of Men is now endangered, but the life also of those
things which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not
without allies, even if you know them not.’
‘Yet also I should be sad,’ said Théoden. ‘For however the fortune
of war shall go, may it not so end that much that was fair and
wonderful shall pass for ever out of Middle-earth?’
‘It may,’ said Gandalf. ‘The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured,
nor made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed.
Let us now go on with the journey we have begun!’
The company turned then away from the Coomb and from the
wood and took the road towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set, already it had sunk behind the rim of the
world; but as they rode out from the shadow of the hills and looked
west to the Gap of Rohan the sky was still red, and a burning light
was under the ﬂoating clouds. Dark against it there wheeled and ﬂew
many black-winged birds. Some passed overhead with mournful cries,
returning to their homes among the rocks.
‘The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-ﬁeld,’ said
Éomer.
They rode now at an easy pace and dark came down upon the
plains about them. The slow moon mounted, now waxing towards
the full, and in its cold silver light the swelling grass-lands rose and
fell like a wide grey sea. They had ridden for some four hours from
the branching of the roads when they drew near to the Fords. Long
slopes ran swiftly down to where the river spread in stony shoals
between high grassy terraces. Borne upon the wind they heard the
howling of wolves. Their hearts were heavy, remembering the many
men that had fallen in battle in this place.
The road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way
through the terraces to the river’s edge, and up again upon the further
side. There were three lines of ﬂat stepping-stones across the stream,
and between them fords for horses, that went from either brink to a
bare eyot in the midst. The riders looked down upon the crossings,

556

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

stone, cracked and splintered into countless jagged shards, was scattered far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch still
stood, but it opened now upon a rooﬂess chasm: the tunnel was laid
bare, and through the cliff-like walls on either side great rents and
breaches had been torn; their towers were beaten into dust. If the
Great Sea had risen in wrath and fallen on the hills with storm, it
could have worked no greater ruin.
The ring beyond was ﬁlled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in which there heaved and ﬂoated a wreckage of beams and
spars, chests and casks and broken gear. Twisted and leaning pillars
reared their splintered stems above the ﬂood, but all the roads were
drowned. Far off, it seemed, half veiled in winding cloud, there
loomed the island rock. Still dark and tall, unbroken by the storm,
the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped about its feet.
The king and all his company sat silent on their horses, marvelling,
perceiving that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they
could not guess. And now they turned their eyes towards the archway
and the ruined gates. There they saw close beside them a great rubbleheap; and suddenly they were aware of two small ﬁgures lying on it
at their ease, grey-clad, hardly to be seen among the stones. There
were bottles and bowls and platters laid beside them, as if they had
just eaten well, and now rested from their labour. One seemed asleep;
the other, with crossed legs and arms behind his head, leaned back
against a broken rock and sent from his mouth long wisps and little
rings of thin blue smoke.
´
For a moment Théoden and Eomer
and all his men stared at them
in wonder. Amid all the wreck of Isengard this seemed to them the
strangest sight. But before the king could speak, the small smokebreathing ﬁgure became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there
silent on the edge of the mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man
he looked, or like one, though not much more than half a man in
height; his head of brown curling hair was uncovered, but he was
clad in a travel-stained cloak of the same hue and shape as the companions of Gandalf had worn when they rode to Edoras. He bowed
very low, putting his hand upon his breast. Then, seeming not to
´
observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Eomer
and the king.
‘Welcome, my lords, to Isengard!’ he said. ‘We are the doorwardens. Meriadoc, son of Saradoc is my name; and my companion, who,
alas! is overcome with weariness’ – here he gave the other a dig with
his foot – ‘is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the House of Took. Far in
the North is our home. The Lord Saruman is within; but at the
moment he is closeted with one Wormtongue, or doubtless he would
be here to welcome such honourable guests.’

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

557

‘Doubtless he would!’ laughed Gandalf. ‘And was it Saruman that
ordered you to guard his damaged doors, and watch for the arrival
of guests, when your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?’
‘No, good sir, the matter escaped him,’ answered Merry gravely.
‘He has been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who
has taken over the management of Isengard. He commanded me
to welcome the Lord of Rohan with ﬁtting words. I have done my
best.’
‘And what about your companions? What about Legolas and me?’
cried Gimli, unable to contain himself longer. ‘You rascals, you
woolly-footed and wool-pated truants! A ﬁne hunt you have led us!
Two hundred leagues, through fen and forest, battle and death, to
rescue you! And here we ﬁnd you feasting and idling – and smoking!
Smoking! Where did you come by the weed, you villains? Hammer
and tongs! I am so torn between rage and joy, that if I do not burst,
it will be a marvel!’
‘You speak for me, Gimli,’ laughed Legolas. ‘Though I would
sooner learn how they came by the wine.’
‘One thing you have not found in your hunting, and that’s brighter
wits,’ said Pippin, opening an eye. ‘Here you ﬁnd us sitting on a ﬁeld
of victory, amid the plunder of armies, and you wonder how we came
by a few well-earned comforts!’
‘Well-earned?’ said Gimli. ‘I cannot believe that!’
The Riders laughed. ‘It cannot be doubted that we witness the
meeting of dear friends,’ said Théoden. ‘So these are the lost ones
of your company, Gandalf ? The days are fated to be ﬁlled with
marvels. Already I have seen many since I left my house; and now
here before my eyes stand yet another of the folk of legend. Are not
these the Halﬂings, that some among us call the Holbytlan?’
‘Hobbits, if you please, lord,’ said Pippin.
‘Hobbits?’ said Théoden. ‘Your tongue is strangely changed; but
the name sounds not unﬁtting so. Hobbits! No report that I have
heard does justice to the truth.’
Merry bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. ‘You are gracious, lord; or I hope that I may so take your words,’ he said. ‘And
here is another marvel! I have wandered in many lands, since I left
my home, and never till now have I found people that knew any story
concerning hobbits.’
‘My people came out of the North long ago,’ said Théoden. ‘But
I will not deceive you: we know no tales about hobbits. All that is
said among us is that far away, over many hills and rivers, live the
halﬂing folk that dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no
legends of their deeds, for it is said that they do little, and avoid the
sight of men, being able to vanish in a twinkling; and they can change

558

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

their voices to resemble the piping of birds. But it seems that more
could be said.’
‘It could indeed, lord,’ said Merry.
‘For one thing,’ said Théoden, ‘I had not heard that they spouted
smoke from their mouths.’
‘That is not surprising,’ answered Merry; ‘for it is an art which
we have not practised for more than a few generations. It was Tobold
Hornblower, of Longbottom in the Southfarthing, who ﬁrst grew the
true pipe-weed in his gardens, about the year 1070 according to our
reckoning. How old Toby came by the plant . . .’
‘You do not know your danger, Théoden,’ interrupted Gandalf.
‘These hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures
of the table, or the small doings of their fathers, grandfathers, and
great-grandfathers, and remoter cousins to the ninth degree, if you
encourage them with undue patience. Some other time would be
more ﬁtting for the history of smoking. Where is Treebeard, Merry?’
‘Away on the north side, I believe. He went to get a drink – of
clean water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their
work – over there.’ Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake;
and as they looked, they heard a distant rumbling and rattling, as if
an avalanche was falling from the mountain-side. Far away came a
hoom-hom, as of horns blowing triumphantly.
‘And is Orthanc then left unguarded?’ asked Gandalf.
‘There is the water,’ said Merry. ‘But Quickbeam and some others
are watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain are of
Saruman’s planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot
of the stair.’
‘Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,’ said Legolas, ‘but his arms are at
his sides, and he stands as still as a door-tree.’
‘It is past noon,’ said Gandalf, ‘and we at any rate have not eaten
since early morning. Yet I wish to see Treebeard as soon as may be.
Did he leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from
your mind?’
‘He left a message,’ said Merry, ‘and I was coming to it, but I
have been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if
the Lord of the Mark and Gandalf will ride to the northern wall they
will ﬁnd Treebeard there, and he will welcome them. I may add that
they will also ﬁnd food of the best there, it was discovered and selected
by your humble servants.’ He bowed.
Gandalf laughed. ‘That is better!’ he said. ‘Well, Théoden, will you
ride with me to ﬁnd Treebeard? We must go round about, but it is not
far. When you see Treebeard, you will learn much. For Treebeard is
Fangorn, and the eldest and chief of the Ents, and when you speak with
him you will hear the speech of the oldest of all living things.’

THE ROAD TO ISENGARD

559

‘I will come with you,’ said Théoden. ‘Farewell, my hobbits! May
we meet again in my house! There you shall sit beside me and tell
me all that your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires, as far as
you can reckon them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and
his herb-lore. Farewell!’
The hobbits bowed low. ‘So that is the King of Rohan!’ said Pippin
in an undertone. ‘A ﬁne old fellow. Very polite.’

Chapter 9
FLOTSAM AND JETSAM
Gandalf and the King’s company rode away, turning eastward to
make the circuit of the ruined walls of Isengard. But Aragorn, Gimli,
and Legolas remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to stray in
search of grass, they came and sat beside the hobbits.
‘Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where
none of us ever thought to come,’ said Aragorn.
‘And now that the great ones have gone to discuss high matters,’
said Legolas, ‘the hunters can perhaps learn the answers to their own
small riddles. We tracked you as far as the forest, but there are still
many things that I should like to know the truth of.’
‘And there is a great deal, too, that we want to know about you,’
said Merry. ‘We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old
Ent, but that is not nearly enough.’
‘All in good time,’ said Legolas. ‘We were the hunters, and you
should give an account of yourselves to us ﬁrst.’
‘Or second,’ said Gimli. ‘It would go better after a meal. I have a
sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make amends
by ﬁnding us some of the plunder that you spoke of. Food and drink
would pay off some of my score against you.’
‘Then you shall have it,’ said Pippin. ‘Will you have it here, or in
more comfort in what’s left of Saruman’s guard-house – over there
under the arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on
the road.’
‘Less than an eye!’ said Gimli. ‘But I will not go into any orc-house;
nor touch Orcs’ meat or anything that they have mauled.’
‘We wouldn’t ask you to,’ said Merry. ‘We have had enough of
Orcs ourselves to last a life-time. But there were many other folk in
Isengard. Saruman kept enough wisdom not to trust his Orcs. He
had Men to guard his gates: some of his most faithful servants, I
suppose. Anyway they were favoured and got good provisions.’
‘And pipe-weed?’ asked Gimli.
‘No, I don’t think so,’ Merry laughed. ‘But that is another story,
which can wait until after lunch.’
‘Well let us go and have lunch then!’ said the Dwarf.
The hobbits led the way; and they passed under the arch and came
to a wide door upon the left, at the top of a stair. It opened direct
into a large chamber, with other smaller doors at the far end, and a

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

561

hearth and chimney at one side. The chamber was hewn out of the
stone; and it must once have been dark, for its windows looked out
only into the tunnel. But light came in now through the broken roof.
On the hearth wood was burning.
‘I lit a bit of ﬁre,’ said Pippin. ‘It cheered us up in the fogs. There
were few faggots about, and most of the wood we could ﬁnd was
wet. But there is a great draught in the chimney: it seems to wind
away up through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked.
A ﬁre is handy. I will make you some toast. The bread is three or
four days old, I am afraid.’
Aragorn and his companions sat themselves down at one end of a
long table, and the hobbits disappeared through one of the inner doors.
‘Store-room in there, and above the ﬂoods, luckily,’ said Pippin,
as they came back laden with dishes, bowls, cups, knives, and food
of various sorts.
‘And you need not turn up your nose at the provender, Master
Gimli,’ said Merry. ‘This is not orc-stuff, but man-food, as Treebeard
calls it. Will you have wine or beer? There’s a barrel inside there –
very passable. And this is ﬁrst-rate salted pork. Or I can cut you
some rashers of bacon and broil them, if you like. I am sorry there
is no green stuff: the deliveries have been rather interrupted in the
last few days! I cannot offer you anything to follow but butter and
honey for your bread. Are you content?’
‘Indeed yes,’ said Gimli. ‘The score is much reduced.’
The three were soon busy with their meal; and the two hobbits,
unabashed, set to a second time. ‘We must keep our guests company,’
they said.
‘You are full of courtesy this morning,’ laughed Legolas. ‘But
maybe, if we had not arrived, you would already have been keeping
one another company again.’
‘Maybe; and why not?’ said Pippin. ‘We had foul fare with the
Orcs, and little enough for days before that. It seems a long while
since we could eat to heart’s content.’
‘It does not seem to have done you any harm,’ said Aragorn.
‘Indeed you look in the bloom of health.’
‘Aye, you do indeed,’ said Gimli, looking them up and down over
the top of his cup. ‘Why, your hair is twice as thick and curly as when
we parted; and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if
that is possible for hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate
has not starved you.’
‘He has not,’ said Merry. ‘But Ents only drink, and drink is not
enough for content. Treebeard’s draughts may be nourishing, but
one feels the need of something solid. And even lembas is none the
worse for a change.’

562

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘You have drunk of the waters of the Ents, have you?’ said Legolas.
‘Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli’s eyes do not deceive him.
Strange songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.’
‘Many strange tales have been told about that land,’ said Aragorn.
‘I have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about the
Ents!’
‘Ents,’ said Pippin, ‘Ents are – well Ents are all different for one
thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd.’ He tried a few
fumbling words that trailed off into silence. ‘Oh, well,’ he went on,
‘you have seen some at a distance, already – they saw you at any
rate, and reported that you were on the way – and you will see many
others, I expect, before you leave here. You must form your own
ideas.’
‘Now, now!’ said Gimli. ‘We are beginning the story in the middle.
I should like a tale in the right order, starting with that strange day
when our fellowship was broken.’
‘You shall have it, if there is time,’ said Merry. ‘But ﬁrst – if you
have ﬁnished eating – you shall ﬁll your pipes and light up. And then
for a little while we can pretend that we are all back safe at Bree
again, or in Rivendell.’
He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. ‘We have heaps
of it,’ he said; ‘and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we
go. We did some salvage-work this morning, Pippin and I. There are
lots of things ﬂoating about. It was Pippin who found two small
barrels, washed up out of some cellar or store-house, I suppose.
When we opened them, we found they were ﬁlled with this: as ﬁne
a pipe-weed as you could wish for, and quite unspoilt.’
Gimli took some and rubbed it in his palms and sniffed it. ‘It feels
good, and it smells good,’ he said.
‘It is good!’ said Merry. ‘My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf !
There were the Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as plain as
plain. How it came here, I can’t imagine. For Saruman’s private use,
I fancy. I never knew that it went so far abroad. But it comes in
handy now!’
‘It would,’ said Gimli, ‘if I had a pipe to go with it. Alas, I lost
mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?’
‘No, I am afraid not,’ said Merry. ‘We have not found any, not
even here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself,
it seems. And I don’t think it would be any use knocking on the
doors of Orthanc to beg a pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes,
as good friends must at a pinch.’
‘Half a moment!’ said Pippin. Putting his hand inside the breast
of his jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. ‘I keep a
treasure or two near my skin, as precious as Rings to me. Here’s one:

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

563

my old wooden pipe. And here’s another: an unused one. I have
carried it a long way, though I don’t know why. I never really expected
to ﬁnd any pipe-weed on the journey, when my own ran out. But
now it comes in useful after all.’ He held up a small pipe with a wide
ﬂattened bowl, and handed it to Gimli. ‘Does that settle the score
between us?’ he said.
‘Settle it!’ cried Gimli. ‘Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in
your debt.’
‘Well, I am going back into the open air, to see what the wind
and sky are doing!’ said Legolas.
‘We will come with you,’ said Aragorn.
They went out and seated themselves upon the piled stones before
the gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists
were lifting and ﬂoating away upon the breeze.
‘Now let us take our ease here for a little!’ said Aragorn. ‘We will
sit on the edge of ruin and talk, as Gandalf says, while he is busy
elsewhere. I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before.’ He
wrapped his grey cloak about him, hiding his mail-shirt, and stretched
out his long legs. Then he lay back and sent from his lips a thin
stream of smoke.
‘Look!’ said Pippin. ‘Strider the Ranger has come back!’
‘He has never been away,’ said Aragorn. ‘I am Strider and Dúnadan too, and I belong both to Gondor and the North.’
They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them;
slanting into the valley from among white clouds high in the West.
Legolas lay still, looking up at the sun and sky with steady eyes, and
singing softly to himself. At last he sat up. ‘Come now!’ he said.
‘Time wears on, and the mists are blowing away, or would if you
strange folk did not wreathe yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?’
‘Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and ﬁnding myself
all strung-up in an orc-camp,’ said Pippin. ‘Let me see, what is
today?’
‘The ﬁfth of March in the Shire-reckoning,’ said Aragorn. Pippin
made some calculations on his ﬁngers. ‘Only nine days ago!’ he said.*
‘It seems a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was
like a bad dream, I reckon that three very horrible days followed.
Merry will correct me, if I forget anything important: I am not going
into details: the whips and the ﬁlth and stench and all that; it does
not bear remembering.’ With that he plunged into an account of
Boromir’s last ﬁght and the orc-march from Emyn Muil to the Forest.
* Every month in the Shire-calendar had 30 days.

564

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The others nodded as the various points were ﬁtted in with their
guesses.
‘Here are some treasures that you let fall,’ said Aragorn. ‘You will
be glad to have them back.’ He loosened his belt from under his
cloak, and took from it the two sheathed knives.
‘Well!’ said Merry. ‘I never expected to see those again! I marked
a few orcs with mine; but Uglúk took them from us. How he glared!
At ﬁrst I thought he was going to stab me, but he threw the things
away as if they burned him.’
‘And here also is your brooch, Pippin,’ said Aragorn. ‘I have kept
it safe, for it is a very precious thing.’
‘I know,’ said Pippin. ‘It was a wrench to let it go; but what else
could I do?’
‘Nothing else,’ answered Aragorn. ‘One who cannot cast away a
treasure at need is in fetters. You did rightly.’
‘The cutting of the bands on your wrists, that was smart work!’
said Gimli. ‘Luck served you there; but you seized your chance with
both hands, one might say.’
‘And set us a pretty riddle,’ said Legolas. ‘I wondered if you had
grown wings!’
‘Unfortunately not,’ said Pippin. ‘But you did not know about
Grishnákh.’ He shuddered and said no more, leaving Merry to tell
of those last horrible moments: the pawing hands, the hot breath,
and the dreadful strength of Grishnákh’s hairy arms.
‘All this about the Orcs of Barad-dûr, Lugbúrz as they call it,
makes me uneasy,’ said Aragorn. ‘The Dark Lord already knew too
much, and his servants also; and Grishnákh evidently sent some
message across the River after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be
looking towards Isengard. But Saruman at any rate is in a cleft stick
of his own cutting.’
‘Yes, whichever side wins, his outlook is poor,’ said Merry. ‘Things
began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in
Rohan.’
‘We caught a glimpse of the old villain, or so Gandalf hints,’ said
Gimli. ‘On the edge of the Forest.’
‘When was that?’ asked Pippin.
‘Five nights ago,’ said Aragorn.
‘Let me see,’ said Merry: ‘ﬁve nights ago – now we come to a part
of the story you know nothing about. We met Treebeard that morning
after the battle; and that night we were at Wellinghall, one of his
ent-houses. The next morning we went to Entmoot, a gathering of
Ents, that is, and the queerest thing I have ever seen in my life. It
lasted all that day and the next; and we spent the nights with an Ent
called Quickbeam. And then late in the afternoon in the third day

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

565

of their moot, the Ents suddenly blew up. It was amazing. The Forest
had felt as tense as if a thunderstorm was brewing inside it: then all
at once it exploded. I wish you could have heard their song as they
marched.’
‘If Saruman had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by
now, even if he had had to run on his own legs,’ said Pippin.
‘Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as
bone,
We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door!
There was very much more. A great deal of the song had no words,
and was like a music of horns and drums. It was very exciting. But
I thought it was only marching music and no more, just a song –
until I got here. I know better now.’
‘We came down over the last ridge into Nan Curunı́r, after night
had fallen,’ Merry continued. ‘It was then that I ﬁrst had the feeling
that the Forest itself was moving behind us. I thought I was dreaming
an entish dream, but Pippin had noticed it too. We were both frightened; but we did not ﬁnd out more about it until later.
‘It was the Huorns, or so the Ents call them in ‘‘short language’’.
Treebeard won’t say much about them, but I think they are Ents
that have become almost like trees, at least to look at. They stand
here and there in the wood or under its eaves, silent, watching endlessly over the trees; but deep in the darkest dales there are hundreds
and hundreds of them, I believe.
‘There is a great power in them, and they seem able to wrap
themselves in shadow: it is difﬁcult to see them moving. But they
do. They can move very quickly, if they are angry. You stand still
looking at the weather, maybe, or listening to the rustling of the wind,
and then suddenly you ﬁnd that you are in the middle of a wood
with great groping trees all around you. They still have voices, and
can speak with the Ents – that is why they are called Huorns, Treebeard says – but they have become queer and wild. Dangerous. I
should be terriﬁed of meeting them, if there were no true Ents about
to look after them.
‘Well, in the early night we crept down a long ravine into the
upper end of the Wizard’s Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns
behind. We could not see them, of course, but the whole air was full
of creaking. It was very dark, a cloudy night. They moved at a great
speed as soon as they had left the hills, and made a noise like a
rushing wind. The Moon did not appear through the clouds, and
not long after midnight there was a tall wood all round the north
side of Isengard. There was no sign of enemies nor of any challenge.

566

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

There was a light gleaming from a high window in the tower, that
was all.
‘Treebeard and a few more Ents crept on, right round to within
sight of the great gates. Pippin and I were with him. We were sitting
on Treebeard’s shoulders, and I could feel the quivering tenseness
in him. But even when they are roused, Ents can be very cautious
and patient. They stood still as carved stones, breathing and listening.
‘Then all at once there was a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared,
and the walls of Isengard echoed. We thought that we had been
discovered, and that battle was going to begin. But nothing of the
sort. All Saruman’s people were marching away. I don’t know much
about this war, or about the Horsemen of Rohan, but Saruman seems
to have meant to ﬁnish off the king and all his men with one ﬁnal
blow. He emptied Isengard. I saw the enemy go: endless lines of
marching Orcs; and troops of them mounted on great wolves. And
there were battalions of Men, too. Many of them carried torches,
and in the ﬂare I could see their faces. Most of them were ordinary
men, rather tall and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly evillooking. But there were some others that were horrible: man-high,
but with goblin-faces, sallow, leering, squint-eyed. Do you know,
they reminded me at once of that Southerner at Bree; only he was
not so obviously orc-like as most of these were.’
‘I thought of him too,’ said Aragorn. ‘We had many of these
half-orcs to deal with at Helm’s Deep. It seems plain now that that
Southerner was a spy of Saruman’s; but whether he was working
with the Black Riders, or for Saruman alone, I do not know. It is
difﬁcult with these evil folk to know when they are in league, and
when they are cheating one another.’
‘Well, of all sorts together, there must have been ten thousand at
the very least,’ said Merry. ‘They took an hour to pass out of the
gates. Some went off down the highway to the Fords, and some
turned away and went eastward. A bridge has been built down there,
about a mile away, where the river runs in a very deep channel. You
could see it now, if you stood up. They were all singing with harsh
voices, and laughing, making a hideous din. I thought things looked
very black for Rohan. But Treebeard did not move. He said: ‘‘My
business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.’’
‘But, though I could not see what was happening in the dark, I
believe that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were
shut again. Their business was with Orcs I think. They were far down
the valley in the morning; or at any rate there was a shadow there
that one couldn’t see through.
‘As soon as Saruman had sent off all his army, our turn came.
Treebeard put us down, and went up to the gates, and began ham-

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

567

mering on the doors, and calling for Saruman. There was no answer,
except arrows and stones from the walls. But arrows are no use
against Ents. They hurt them, of course, and infuriate them: like
stinging ﬂies. But an Ent can be stuck as full of orc-arrows as a
pin-cushion, and take no serious harm. They cannot be poisoned,
for one thing; and their skin seems to be very thick, and tougher than
bark. It takes a very heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They
don’t like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe-men
to one Ent: a man that hacks once at an Ent never gets a chance of
a second blow. A punch from an Ent-ﬁst crumples up iron like thin
tin.
‘When Treebeard had got a few arrows in him, he began to warm
up, to get positively ‘‘hasty’’, as he would say. He let out a great
hoom-hom, and a dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent
is terrifying. Their ﬁngers, and their toes, just freeze on to rock; and
they tear it up like bread-crust. It was like watching the work of great
tree-roots in a hundred years, all packed into a few moments.
‘They pushed, pulled, tore, shook, and hammered; and clang-bang,
crash-crack, in ﬁve minutes they had these huge gates just lying in
ruin; and some were already beginning to eat into the walls, like
rabbits in a sand-pit. I don’t know what Saruman thought was happening; but anyway he did not know how to deal with it. His wizardry
may have been falling off lately, of course; but anyway I think he has
not much grit, not much plain courage alone in a tight place without
a lot of slaves and machines and things, if you know what I mean.
Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame was not all
along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.’
‘No,’ said Aragorn. ‘Once he was as great as his fame made him.
His knowledge was deep, his thought was subtle, and his hands marvellously skilled; and he had a power over the minds of others. The
wise he could persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That
power he certainly still keeps. There are not many in Middle-earth
that I should say were safe, if they were left alone to talk with
him, even now when he has suffered a defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and
Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has been laid bare, but
very few others.’
‘The Ents are safe,’ said Pippin. ‘He seems at one time to have
got round them, but never again. And anyway he did not understand
them; and he made the great mistake of leaving them out of his
calculations. He had no plan for them, and there was no time to
make any, once they had set to work. As soon as our attack began,
the few remaining rats in Isengard started bolting through every hole
that the Ents made. The Ents let the Men go, after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down at this end. I don’t think

568

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

many orc-folk, of any size, escaped. Not from the Huorns: there was
a wood full of them all round Isengard by that time, as well as those
that had gone down the valley.
‘When the Ents had reduced a large part of the southern walls to
rubbish, and what was left of his people had bolted and deserted
him, Saruman ﬂed in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates
when we arrived: I expect he came to watch his splendid army march
out. When the Ents broke their way in, he left in a hurry. They did
not spot him at ﬁrst. But the night had opened out, and there was a
great light of stars, quite enough for Ents to see by, and suddenly
Quickbeam gave a cry ‘‘The tree-killer, the tree-killer!’’ Quickbeam
is a gentle creature, but he hates Saruman all the more ﬁercely for
that: his people suffered cruelly from orc-axes. He leapt down the
path from the inner gate, and he can move like a wind when he is
roused. There was a pale ﬁgure hurrying away in and out of the
shadows of the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs to the
tower-door. But it was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after him,
that he was within a step or two of being caught and strangled when
he slipped in through the door.
‘When Saruman was safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before
he set some of his precious machinery to work. By that time there
were many Ents inside Isengard: some had followed Quickbeam, and
others had burst in from the north and east; they were roaming about
and doing a great deal of damage. Suddenly up came ﬁres and foul
fumes: the vents and shafts all over the plain began to spout and
belch. Several of the Ents got scorched and blistered. One of them,
Beechbone I think he was called, a very tall handsome Ent, got caught
in a spray of some liquid ﬁre and burned like a torch: a horrible sight.
‘That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused
before; but I was wrong. I saw what it was like at last. It was staggering. They roared and boomed and trumpeted, until stones began to
crack and fall at the mere noise of them. Merry and I lay on the
ground and stuffed our cloaks into our ears. Round and round the
rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding and storming like a howling
gale, breaking pillars, hurling avalanches of boulders down the shafts,
tossing up huge slabs of stone into the air like leaves. The tower was
in the middle of a spinning whirlwind. I saw iron posts and blocks
of masonry go rocketing up hundreds of feet, and smash against the
windows of Orthanc. But Treebeard kept his head. He had not had
any burns, luckily. He did not want his folk to hurt themselves in
their fury, and he did not want Saruman to escape out of some hole
in the confusion. Many of the Ents were hurling themselves against
the Orthanc-rock; but that defeated them. It is very smooth and hard.
Some wizardry is in it, perhaps, older and stronger than Saruman’s.

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

569

Anyway they could not get a grip on it, or make a crack in it; and
they were bruising and wounding themselves against it.
‘So Treebeard went out into the ring and shouted. His enormous
voice rose above all the din. There was a dead silence, suddenly. In
it we heard a shrill laugh from a high window in the tower. That had
a queer effect on the Ents. They had been boiling over; now they
became cold, grim as ice, and quiet. They left the plain and gathered
round Treebeard, standing quite still. He spoke to them for a little
in their own language; I think he was telling them of a plan he had
made in his old head long before. Then they just faded silently away
in the grey light. Day was dawning by that time.
‘They set a watch on the tower, I believe, but the watchers were
so well hidden in shadows and kept so still, that I could not see them.
The others went away north. All that day they were busy, out of
sight. Most of the time we were left alone. It was a dreary day; and
we wandered about a bit, though we kept out of the view of the
windows of Orthanc, as much as we could: they stared at us so
threateningly. A good deal of the time we spent looking for something
to eat. And also we sat and talked, wondering what was happening
away south in Rohan, and what had become of all the rest of our
Company. Every now and then we could hear in the distance the
rattle and fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills.
‘In the afternoon we walked round the circle, and went to have a
look at what was going on. There was a great shadowy wood of
Huorns at the head of the valley, and another round the northern
wall. We did not dare to go in. But there was a rending, tearing noise
of work going on inside. Ents and Huorns were digging great pits
and trenches, and making great pools and dams, gathering all the
waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream that they could
ﬁnd. We left them to it.
‘At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming and
booming to himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched his
great arms and legs and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired.
‘ ‘‘Tired?’’ he said, ‘‘tired? Well no, not tired, but stiff. I need a
good draught of Entwash. We have worked hard; we have done more
stone-cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many
a long year before. But it is nearly ﬁnished. When night falls do not
linger near this gate or in the old tunnel! Water may come through
– and it will be foul water for a while, until all the ﬁlth of Saruman
is washed away. Then Isen can run clean again.’’ He began to pull
down a bit more of the walls, in a leisurely sort of way, just to amuse
himself.
‘We were just wondering where it would be safe to lie and get
some sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There

570

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was the sound of a rider coming swiftly up the road. Merry and I lay
quiet, and Treebeard hid himself in the shadows under the arch.
Suddenly a great horse came striding up, like a ﬂash of silver. It was
already dark, but I could see the rider’s face clearly: it seemed to
shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat up, staring, with my
mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn’t.
‘There was no need. He halted just by us and looked down at us.
‘‘Gandalf !’’ I said at last, but my voice was only a whisper. Did he
say: ‘‘Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!’’? No, indeed! He
said: ‘‘Get up, you tom-fool of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder,
in all this ruin is Treebeard? I want him. Quick!’’
‘Treebeard heard his voice and came out of the shadows at once;
and there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of
them seemed surprised at all. Gandalf obviously expected to ﬁnd
Treebeard here; and Treebeard might almost have been loitering
about near the gates on purpose to meet him. Yet we had told the
old Ent all about Moria. But then I remembered a queer look he
gave us at the time. I can only suppose that he had seen Gandalf or
had some news of him, but would not say anything in a hurry. ‘‘Don’t
be hasty’’ is his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say much
about Gandalf ’s movements when he is not there.
‘ ‘‘Hoom! Gandalf !’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘I am glad you have come.
Wood and water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard
to manage here.’’
‘ ‘‘Treebeard,’’ said Gandalf. ‘‘I need your help. You have done
much, but I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage.’’
‘Then those two went off and had a council together in some
corner. It must have seemed very hasty to Treebeard, for Gandalf
was in a tremendous hurry, and was already talking at a great pace,
before they passed out of hearing. They were only away a matter of
minutes, perhaps a quarter of an hour. Then Gandalf came back to
us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He did say he was glad
to see us, then.
‘ ‘‘But Gandalf,’’ I cried, ‘‘where have you been? And have you
seen the others?’’
‘ ‘‘Wherever I have been, I am back,’’ he answered in the genuine
Gandalf manner. ‘‘Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news
must wait. This is a perilous night, and I must ride fast. But the
dawn may be brighter; and if so, we shall meet again. Take care of
yourselves, and keep away from Orthanc! Good-bye!’’
‘Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had
evidently learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He looked
at us and said: ‘‘Hm, well, I ﬁnd you are not such hasty folk as I
thought. You said much less than you might, and no more than you

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

571

should. Hm, this is a bundle of news and no mistake! Well, now
Treebeard must get busy again.’’
‘Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it did not
cheer us up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you
three than about Frodo and Sam, or about poor Boromir. For we
gathered that there was a great battle going on, or soon would be,
and that you were in it, and might never come out of it.
‘ ‘‘Huorns will help,’’ said Treebeard. Then he went away and we
did not see him again until this morning.
‘It was deep night. We lay on top of a pile of stone, and could see
nothing beyond it. Mist or shadows blotted out everything like a great
blanket all round us. The air seemed hot and heavy; and it was full
of rustlings, creakings, and a murmur like voices passing. I think that
hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in
the battle. Later there was a great rumble of thunder away south,
and ﬂashes of lightning far away across Rohan. Every now and then
we could see mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab out suddenly, black and white, and then vanish. And behind us there were
noises like thunder in hills, but different. At times the whole valley
echoed.
‘It must have been about midnight when the Ents broke the dams
and poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern
wall, down into Isengard. The Huorn-dark had passed, and the thunder had rolled away. The Moon was sinking behind the western
mountains.
‘Isengard began to ﬁll up with black creeping streams and pools.
They glittered in the last light of the Moon, as they spread over the
plain. Every now and then the waters found their way down into
some shaft or spouthole. Great white steams hissed up. Smoke rose
in billows. There were explosions and gusts of ﬁre. One great coil of
vapour went whirling up, twisting round and round Orthanc, until
it looked like a tall peak of cloud, ﬁery underneath and moonlit above.
And still more water poured in, until at last Isengard looked like a
huge ﬂat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.’
‘We saw a cloud of smoke and steam from the south last night,
when we came to the mouth of Nan Curunı́r,’ said Aragorn. ‘We
feared that Saruman was brewing some new devilry for us.’
‘Not he!’ said Pippin. ‘He was probably choking and not laughing
any more. By the morning, yesterday morning, the water had sunk
down into all the holes, and there was a dense fog. We took refuge
in that guardroom over there; and we had rather a fright. The lake
began to overﬂow and pour out through the old tunnel, and the water
was rapidly rising up the steps. We thought we were going to get

572

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

caught like Orcs in a hole; but we found a winding stair at the back
of the store-room that brought us out on top of the arch. It was a
squeeze to get out, as the passages had been cracked and half blocked
with fallen stone near the top. There we sat high up above the ﬂoods
and watched the drowning of Isengard. The Ents kept on pouring in
more water, till all the ﬁres were quenched and every cave ﬁlled. The
fogs slowly gathered together and steamed up into a huge umbrella
of cloud: it must have been a mile high. In the evening there was a
great rainbow over the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted
out by a thick drizzle on the mountain-sides. It all went very quiet.
A few wolves howled mournfully, far away. The Ents stopped the
inﬂow in the night, and sent the Isen back into its old course. And
that was the end of it all.
‘Since then the water has been sinking again. There must be outlets
somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps
out of any of his windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We
felt very lonely. Not even a visible Ent to talk to in all the ruin; and
no news. We spent the night up on top there above the arch, and it
was cold and damp and we did not sleep. We had a feeling that
anything might happen at any minute. Saruman is still in his tower.
There was a noise in the night like a wind coming up the valley. I
think the Ents and Huorns that had been away came back then; but
where they have all gone to now, I don’t know. It was a misty, moisty
morning when we climbed down and looked round again, and nobody
was about. And that is about all there is to tell. It seems almost
peaceful now after all the turmoil. And safer too, somehow, since
Gandalf came back. I could sleep!’
They all fell silent for a while. Gimli re-ﬁlled his pipe. ‘There is
one thing I wonder about,’ he said as he lit it with his ﬂint and tinder:
‘Wormtongue. You told Théoden he was with Saruman. How did
he get there?’
‘Oh yes, I forgot about him,’ said Pippin. ‘He did not get here till
this morning. We had just lit the ﬁre and had some breakfast when
Treebeard appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our
names outside.
‘ ‘‘I have just come round to see how you are faring, my lads,’’ he
said; ‘‘and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All’s well;
aye very well indeed!’’ he laughed, and slapped his thighs. ‘‘No more
Orcs in Isengard, no more axes! And there will be folk coming up from
the South before the day is old; some that you may be glad to see.’’
‘He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on
the road. We rushed out before the gates, and I stood and stared,

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

573

half expecting to see Strider and Gandalf come riding up at the head
of an army. But out of the mist there rode a man on an old tired
horse; and he looked a queer twisted sort of creature himself. There
was no one else. When he came out of the mist and suddenly saw
all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he sat and gaped, and his
face went almost green. He was so bewildered that he did not seem
to notice us at ﬁrst. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to turn
his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides, put
out a long arm, and lifted him out of the saddle. His horse bolted in
terror, and he grovelled on the ground. He said he was Grı́ma, friend
and counsellor of the king, and had been sent with important messages from Théoden to Saruman.
‘ ‘‘No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full
of foul Orcs,’’ he said, ‘‘so I was sent. And I have had a perilous
journey, and I am hungry and weary. I ﬂed far north out of my way,
pursued by wolves.’’
‘I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to
myself ‘‘liar’’. Treebeard looked at him in his long slow way for
several minutes, till the wretched man was squirming on the ﬂoor.
Then at last he said: ‘‘Ha, hm, I was expecting you, Master Wormtongue.’’ The man started at that name. ‘‘Gandalf got here ﬁrst. So
I know as much about you as I need, and I know what to do with
you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. I am the
master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you
can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of.’’
‘ ‘‘Let me go, let me go!’’ said Wormtongue. ‘‘I know the way.’’
‘ ‘‘You knew the way, I don’t doubt,’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘But things
have changed here a little. Go and see!’’
‘He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch, with
us close behind, until he came inside the ring and could see all the
ﬂoods that lay between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us.
‘ ‘‘Let me go away!’’ he whined. ‘‘Let me go away! My messages
are useless now.’’
‘ ‘‘They are indeed,’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘But you have only two
choices: to stay with me until Gandalf and your master arrive; or to
cross the water. Which will you have?’’
‘The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot
into the water; but he drew back. ‘‘I cannot swim,’’ he said.
‘ ‘‘The water is not deep,’’ said Treebeard. ‘‘It is dirty, but that
will not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!’’
‘With that the wretch ﬂoundered off into the ﬂood. It rose up
nearly to his neck before he got too far away for me to see him. The
last I saw of him was clinging to some old barrel or piece of wood.
But Treebeard waded after him, and watched his progress.

574

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘ ‘‘Well, he has gone in,’’ he said when he returned. ‘‘I saw him
crawling up the steps like a draggled rat. There is someone in the
tower still: a hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and
I hope the welcome is to his liking. Now I must go and wash myself
clean of the slime. I’ll be away up on the north side, if anyone wants
to see me. There is no clean water down here ﬁt for an Ent to drink,
or to bathe in. So I will ask you two lads to keep a watch at the gate
for the folk that are coming. There’ll be the Lord of the Fields of
Rohan, mark you! You must welcome him as well as you know how:
his men have fought a great ﬁght with the Orcs. Maybe, you know
the right fashion of Men’s words for such a lord, better than Ents.
There have been many lords in the green ﬁelds in my time, and I
have never learned their speech or their names. They will be wanting
man-food, and you know all about that, I guess. So ﬁnd what you
think is ﬁt for a king to eat, if you can.’’ And that is the end of the
story. Though I should like to know who this Wormtongue is. Was
he really the king’s counsellor?’
‘He was,’ said Aragorn; ‘and also Saruman’s spy and servant in
Rohan. Fate has not been kinder to him than he deserves. The sight
of the ruin of all that he thought so strong and magniﬁcent must
have been almost punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits
him.’
‘Yes, I don’t suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of kindness,’ said Merry. ‘He seemed rather grimly delighted with the
business, and was laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe
and drink. We spent a busy time after that, searching the ﬂotsam, and
rummaging about. We found two or three store-rooms in different
places nearby, above the ﬂood-level. But Treebeard sent some Ents
down, and they carried off a great deal of the stuff.
‘ ‘‘We want man-food for twenty-ﬁve,’’ the Ents said, so you can
see that somebody had counted your company carefully before you
arrived. You three were evidently meant to go with the great people.
But you would not have fared any better. We kept as good as we
sent, I promise you. Better, because we sent no drink.
‘ ‘‘What about drink?’’ I said to the Ents.
‘ ‘‘There is water of Isen,’’ they said, ‘‘and that is good enough
for Ents and Men.’’ But I hope that the Ents may have found time
to brew some of their draughts from the mountain-springs, and we
shall see Gandalf ’s beard curling when he returns. After the Ents
had gone, we felt tired, and hungry. But we did not grumble – our
labours had been well rewarded. It was through our search for manfood that Pippin discovered the prize of all the ﬂotsam, those Hornblower barrels. ‘‘Pipe-weed is better after food,’’ said Pippin; that is
how the situation arose.’

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

575

‘We understand it all perfectly now,’ said Gimli.
‘All except one thing,’ said Aragorn: ‘leaf from the Southfarthing
in Isengard. The more I consider it, the more curious I ﬁnd it. I have
never been in Isengard, but I have journeyed in this land, and I
know well the empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire.
Neither goods nor folk have passed that way for many a long year,
not openly. Saruman had secret dealings with someone in the Shire,
I guess. Wormtongues may be found in other houses than King
Théoden’s. Was there a date on the barrels?’
‘Yes,’ said Pippin. ‘It was the 1417 crop, that is last year’s; no, the
year before, of course, now: a good year.’
‘Ah well, whatever evil was afoot is over now, I hope; or else it is
beyond our reach at present,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet I think I shall mention it to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great
affairs.’
‘I wonder what he is doing,’ said Merry. ‘The afternoon is getting
on. Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at any
rate, Strider, if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.’

Chapter 10
THE VOICE OF SARUMAN
They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of
stones, gazing at the dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows,
a menace still in the desolation that lay all about it. The waters had
now nearly all subsided. Here and there gloomy pools remained,
covered with scum and wreckage; but most of the wide circle was
bare again, a wilderness of slime and tumbled rock, pitted with blackened holes, and dotted with posts and pillars leaning drunkenly this
way and that. At the rim of the shattered bowl there lay vast mounds
and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great storm; and beyond
them the green and tangled valley ran up into the long ravine between
the dark arms of the mountains. Across the waste they saw riders
picking their way; they were coming from the north side, and already
they were drawing near to Orthanc.
‘There is Gandalf, and Théoden and his men!’ said Legolas. ‘Let
us go and meet them!’
‘Walk warily!’ said Merry. ‘There are loose slabs that may tilt up
and throw you down into a pit, if you don’t take care.’
They followed what was left of the road from the gates to Orthanc,
going slowly, for the ﬂag-stones were cracked and slimed. The riders,
seeing them approach, halted under the shadow of the rock and
waited for them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them.
‘Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting discussions, and
made a few plans,’ he said; ‘and we have all had some much-needed
rest. Now we must be going on again. I hope you companions have
all rested, too, and refreshed yourselves?’
‘We have,’ said Merry. ‘But our discussions began and ended in
smoke. Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.’
‘Do you indeed?’ said Gandalf. ‘Well, I do not. I have now a last
task to do before I go: I must pay Saruman a farewell visit. Dangerous,
and probably useless; but it must be done. Those of you who wish
may come with me – but beware! And do not jest! This is not the
time for it.’
‘I will come,’ said Gimli. ‘I wish to see him and learn if he really
looks like you.’
‘And how will you learn that, Master Dwarf ?’ said Gandalf.
‘Saruman could look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose
with you. And are you yet wise enough to detect all his counterfeits?

THE VOICE OF SARUMAN

577

Well, we shall see, perhaps. He may be shy of showing himself before
many different eyes together. But I have ordered all the Ents to
remove themselves from sight, so perhaps we shall persuade him to
come out.’
‘What’s the danger?’ asked Pippin. ‘Will he shoot at us, and pour
ﬁre out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?’
‘The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light heart,’
said Gandalf. ‘But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose
to try. A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman
has powers you do not guess. Beware of his voice!’
They came now to the foot of Orthanc. It was black, and the rock
gleamed as if it were wet. The many faces of the stone had sharp
edges as though they had been newly chiselled. A few scorings, and
small ﬂake-like splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore
of the fury of the Ents.
On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great
door, high above the ground; and over it was a shuttered window,
opening upon a balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold
of the door there mounted a ﬂight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn
by some unknown art of the same black stone. This was the only
entrance to the tower; but many tall windows were cut with deep
embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like little eyes
in the sheer faces of the horns.
At the foot of the stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. ‘I will
go up,’ said Gandalf. ‘I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.’
‘And I too will go up,’ said the king. ‘I am old, and fear no peril
any more. I wish to speak with the enemy who has done me so much
´
wrong. Eomer
shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not
falter.’
‘As you will,’ said Gandalf. ‘Aragorn shall come with me. Let the
others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough,
if there is anything to hear or see.’
‘Nay!’ said Gimli. ‘Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone
here represent our kindreds. We also will come behind.’
‘Come then!’ said Gandalf, and with that he climbed the steps,
and Théoden went beside him.
The Riders of Rohan sat uneasily upon their horses, on either side
of the stair, and looked up darkly at the great tower, fearing what
might befall their lord. Merry and Pippin sat on the bottom step,
feeling both unimportant and unsafe.
‘Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!’ muttered Pippin. ‘I wish
I could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come
for? We are not wanted.’

THE VOICE OF SARUMAN

585

Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding the storm. Unhappy fool!
He will be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms
to Isengard. We cannot destroy Orthanc from without, but Sauron
– who knows what he can do?’
‘And what if Sauron does not conquer? What will you do to him?’
asked Pippin.
‘I? Nothing!’ said Gandalf. ‘I will do nothing to him. I do not wish
for mastery. What will become of him? I cannot say. I grieve that so
much that was good now festers in the tower. Still for us things have
not gone badly. Strange are the turns of fortune! Often does hatred
hurt itself ! I guess that, even if we had entered in, we could have
found few treasures in Orthanc more precious than the thing which
Wormtongue threw down at us.’
A shrill shriek, suddenly cut off, came from an open window high
above.
‘It seems that Saruman thinks so too,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us leave
them!’
They returned now to the ruins of the gate. Hardly had they passed
out under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled
stones where they had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came
striding up. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas gazed at them in wonder.
‘Here are three of my companions, Treebeard,’ said Gandalf. ‘I
have spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.’ He named
them one by one.
The Old Ent looked at them long and searchingly, and spoke to
them in turn. Last he turned to Legolas. ‘So you have come all the
way from Mirkwood, my good Elf ? A very great forest it used to be!’
‘And still is,’ said Legolas. ‘But not so great that we who dwell
there ever tire of seeing new trees. I should dearly love to journey in
Fangorn’s Wood. I scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and I did
not wish to turn back.’
Treebeard’s eyes gleamed with pleasure. ‘I hope you may have
your wish, ere the hills be much older,’ he said.
‘I will come, if I have the fortune,’ said Legolas. ‘I have made a
bargain with my friend that, if all goes well, we will visit Fangorn
together – by your leave.’
‘Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,’ said Treebeard.
‘The friend I speak of is not an Elf,’ said Legolas; ‘I mean Gimli,
Glóin’s son here.’ Gimli bowed low, and the axe slipped from his
belt and clattered on the ground.
‘Hoom, hm! Ah now,’ said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him.
‘A dwarf and an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good will to Elves; but
you ask much. This is a strange friendship!’

586

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Strange it may seem,’ said Legolas; ‘but while Gimli lives I shall
not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but for orc-necks,
O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn’s Wood. Forty-two he hewed in the
battle.’
‘Hoo! Come now!’ said Treebeard. ‘That is a better story! Well,
well, things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet
them. But now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end,
yet Gandalf says you must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark
is eager for his own house.’
‘Yes, we must go, and go now,’ said Gandalf. ‘I fear that I must
take your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough
without them.’
‘Maybe I shall,’ said Treebeard. ‘But I shall miss them. We have
become friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting hasty
– growing backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there, they are the
ﬁrst new thing under Sun or Moon that I have seen for many a long,
long day. I shall not forget them. I have put their names into the
Long List. Ents will remember it.
Ents the earthborn, old as mountains,
the wide-walkers, water drinking;
and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children,
the laughing-folk, the little people,
they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you
well! But if you hear news up in your pleasant land, in the Shire,
send me word! You know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives.
Come yourselves if you can!’
‘We will!’ said Merry and Pippin together, and they turned away
hastily. Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking
his head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.
‘So Saruman would not leave?’ he said. ‘I did not think he would.
His heart is as rotten as a black Huorn’s. Still, if I were overcome
and all my trees destroyed, I would not come while I had one dark
hole left to hide in.’
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you have not plotted to cover all the
world with your trees and choke all other living things. But there it
is, Saruman remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs
as he can. He has the Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed
to escape.’
‘Indeed no! Ents will see to that,’ said Treebeard. ‘Saruman shall
not set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over
him.’
‘Good!’ said Gandalf. ‘That is what I hoped. Now I can go and

658

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

call it.’ Here Faramir started and grew intent. ‘Seven companions
we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left at Parth Galen above
Rauros: two of my kin; a Dwarf there was also, and an Elf, and two
Men. They were Aragorn; and Boromir, who said that he came out
of Minas Tirith, a city in the South.’
‘Boromir!’ all the four men exclaimed.
‘Boromir son of the Lord Denethor?’ said Faramir, and a strange
stern look came into his face. ‘You came with him? That is news
indeed, if it be true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir son of
Denethor was High Warden of the White Tower, and our CaptainGeneral: sorely do we miss him. Who are you then, and what had
you to do with him? Be swift, for the Sun is climbing!’
‘Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to
Rivendell?’ Frodo replied.
Seek for the Sword that was Broken.
In Imladris it dwells.
‘The words are known indeed,’ said Faramir in astonishment. ‘It
is some token of your truth that you also know them.’
‘Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,’
said Frodo. ‘And we are the Halﬂings that the rhyme spoke of.’
‘That I see,’ said Faramir thoughtfully. ‘Or I see that it might be
so. And what is Isildur’s Bane?’
‘That is hidden,’ answered Frodo. ‘Doubtless it will be made clear
in time.’
‘We must learn more of this,’ said Faramir, ‘and know what brings
you so far east under the shadow of yonder——,’ he pointed and
said no name. ‘But not now. We have business in hand. You are in
peril, and you would not have gone far by ﬁeld or road this day.
There will be hard handstrokes nigh at hand ere the day is full. Then
death, or swift ﬂight back to Anduin. I will leave two to guard you,
for your good and for mine. Wise man trusts not to chance-meeting
on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with you.’
‘Farewell!’ said Frodo, bowing low. ‘Think what you will, I am a
friend of all enemies of the One Enemy. We would go with you, if
we halﬂing folk could hope to serve you, such doughty men and
strong as you seem, and if my errand permitted it. May the light
shine on your swords!’
‘The Halﬂings are courteous folk, whatever else they be,’ said
Faramir. ‘Farewell!’
The hobbits sat down again, but they said nothing to one another
of their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just under the dappling

Chapter 2
THE PASSING OF THE
GREY COMPANY
Gandalf was gone, and the thudding hoofs of Shadowfax were lost
in the night, when Merry came back to Aragorn. He had only a light
bundle, for he had lost his pack at Parth Galen, and all he had was
a few useful things he had picked up among the wreckage of Isengard.
Hasufel was already saddled. Legolas and Gimli with their horse
stood close by.
‘So four of the Company still remain,’ said Aragorn. ‘We will ride
on together. But we shall not go alone, as I thought. The king is now
determined to set out at once. Since the coming of the winged
shadow, he desires to return to the hills under cover of night.’
‘And then whither?’ said Legolas.
‘I cannot say yet,’ Aragorn answered. ‘As for the king, he will go
to the muster that he commanded at Edoras, four nights from now.
And there, I think, he will hear tidings of war, and the Riders of
Rohan will go down to Minas Tirith. But for myself, and any that
will go with me . . .’
‘I for one!’ cried Legolas. ‘And Gimli with him!’ said the Dwarf.
‘Well, for myself,’ said Aragorn, ‘it is dark before me. I must go
down also to Minas Tirith, but I do not yet see the road. An hour
long prepared approaches.’
‘Don’t leave me behind!’ said Merry. ‘I have not been of much
use yet; but I don’t want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called
for when all is over. I don’t think the Riders will want to be bothered
with me now. Though, of course, the king did say that I was to sit
by him when he came to his house and tell him all about the Shire.’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘and your road lies with him, I think, Merry.
But do not look for mirth at the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere
Théoden sits at ease again in Meduseld. Many hopes will wither in
this bitter Spring.’
Soon all were ready to depart: twenty-four horses, with Gimli
behind Legolas, and Merry in front of Aragorn. Presently they were
riding swiftly through the night. They had not long passed the
mounds at the Fords of Isen, when a Rider galloped up from the
rear of their line.
‘My lord,’ he said to the king, ‘there are horsemen behind us. As

THE PASSING OF THE GREY COMPANY

775

that could be gathered in haste; but the brethren Elladan and Elrohir
have ridden with us, desiring to go to the war. We rode as swiftly as
we might when your summons came.’
‘But I did not summon you,’ said Aragorn, ‘save only in wish. My
thoughts have often turned to you, and seldom more than tonight;
yet I have sent no word. But come! All such matters must wait. You
ﬁnd us riding in haste and danger. Ride with us now, if the king will
give his leave.’
Théoden was indeed glad of the news. ‘It is well!’ he said. ‘If these
kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such
knights will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.’
Then the Riders set out again, and Aragorn for a while rode with
the Dúnedain; and when they had spoken of tidings in the North
and in the South, Elrohir said to him:
‘I bring word to you from my father: The days are short. If thou art
in haste, remember the Paths of the Dead.’
‘Always my days have seemed to me too short to achieve my
desire,’ answered Aragorn. ‘But great indeed will be my haste ere I
take that road.’
‘That will soon be seen,’ said Elrohir. ‘But let us speak no more
of these things upon the open road!’
And Aragorn said to Halbarad: ‘What is that that you bear, kinsman?’ For he saw that instead of a spear he bore a tall staff, as it
were a standard, but it was close-furled in a black cloth bound about
with many thongs.
‘It is a gift that I bring you from the Lady of Rivendell,’ answered
Halbarad. ‘She wrought it in secret, and long was the making. But
she also sends word to you: The days now are short. Either our hope
cometh, or all hope’s end. Therefore I send thee what I have made for thee.
Fare well, Elfstone!’
And Aragorn said: ‘Now I know what you bear. Bear it still for
me a while!’ And he turned and looked away to the North under the
great stars, and then he fell silent and spoke no more while the night’s
journey lasted.
The night was old and the East grey when they rode up at last
from Deeping-coomb and came back to the Hornburg. There they
were to lie and rest for a brief while and take counsel.
Merry slept until he was roused by Legolas and Gimli. ‘The Sun
is high,’ said Legolas. ‘All others are up and doing. Come, Master
Sluggard, and look at this place while you may!’
‘There was a battle here three nights ago,’ said Gimli, ‘and here
Legolas and I played a game that I won only by a single orc. Come

776

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and see how it was! And there are caves, Merry, caves of wonder!
Shall we visit them, Legolas, do you think?’
‘Nay! There is no time,’ said the Elf. ‘Do not spoil the wonder
with haste! I have given you my word to return hither with you, if a
day of peace and freedom comes again. But it is now near to noon,
and at that hour we eat, and then set out again, I hear.’
Merry got up and yawned. His few hours’ sleep had not been
nearly enough; he was tired and rather dismal. He missed Pippin,
and felt that he was only a burden, while everybody was making plans
for speed in a business that he did not fully understand. ‘Where is
Aragorn?’ he asked.
‘In a high chamber of the Burg,’ said Legolas. ‘He has neither
rested nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that
he must take thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with
him; but some dark doubt or care sits on him.’
‘They are a strange company, these newcomers,’ said Gimli. ‘Stout
men and lordly they are, and the Riders of Rohan look almost as
boys beside them; for they are grim men of face, worn like weathered
rocks for the most part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.’
‘But even as Aragorn they are courteous, if they break their silence,’
said Legolas. ‘And have you marked the brethren Elladan and
Elrohir? Less sombre is their gear than the others’, and they are fair
and gallant as Elven-lords; and that is not to be wondered at in the
sons of Elrond of Rivendell.’
‘Why have they come? Have you heard?’ asked Merry. He had
now dressed, and he ﬂung his grey cloak about his shoulders; and
the three passed out together towards the ruined gate of the Burg.
‘They answered a summons, as you heard,’ said Gimli. ‘Word
came to Rivendell, they say: Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the
Dúnedain ride to him in Rohan! But whence this message came they
are now in doubt. Gandalf sent it, I would guess.’
‘Nay, Galadriel,’ said Legolas. ‘Did she not speak through Gandalf
of the ride of the Grey Company from the North?’
‘Yes, you have it,’ said Gimli. ‘The Lady of the Wood! She read
many hearts and desires. Now why did not we wish for some of our
own kinsfolk, Legolas?’
Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away
north and east, and his fair face was troubled. ‘I do not think that
any would come,’ he answered. ‘They have no need to ride to war;
war already marches on their own lands.’
For a while the three companions walked together, speaking of
this and that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken
gate, and passed the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside

THE PASSING OF THE GREY COMPANY

777

the road, until they stood on Helm’s Dike and looked into the
Coomb. The Death Down already stood there, black and tall and
stony, and the great trampling and scoring of the grass by the Huorns
could be plainly seen. The Dunlendings and many men of the garrison of the Burg were at work on the Dike or in the ﬁelds and about
the battered walls behind; yet all seemed strangely quiet: a weary
valley resting after a great storm. Soon they turned back and went
to the midday meal in the hall of the Burg.
The king was already there, and as soon as they entered he called
for Merry and had a seat set for him at his side. ‘It is not as I would
have it,’ said Théoden; ‘for this is little like my fair house in Edoras.
And your friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long
ere we sit, you and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no
time for feasting when I return thither. But come now! Eat and drink,
and let us speak together while we may. And then you shall ride with
me.’
‘May I?’ said Merry, surprised and delighted. ‘That would be
splendid!’ He had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words.
‘I am afraid I am only in everybody’s way,’ he stammered; ‘but I
should like to do anything I could, you know.’
‘I doubt it not,’ said the king. ‘I have had a good hill-pony made
ready for you. He will bear you as swift as any horse by the roads
that we shall take. For I will ride from the Burg by mountain paths,
not by the plain, and so come to Edoras by way of Dunharrow where
´
the Lady Eowyn
awaits me. You shall be my esquire, if you will. Is
´
there gear of war in this place, Eomer,
that my sword-thain could
use?’
´
‘There are no great weapon-hoards here, lord,’ answered Eomer.
‘Maybe a light helm might be found to ﬁt him; but we have no mail
or sword for one of his stature.’
‘I have a sword,’ said Merry, climbing from his seat, and drawing
from its black sheath his small bright blade. Filled suddenly with love
for this old man, he knelt on one knee, and took his hand and kissed
it. ‘May I lay the sword of Meriadoc of the Shire on your lap, Théoden
King?’ he cried. ‘Receive my service, if you will!’
‘Gladly will I take it,’ said the king; and laying his long old hands
upon the brown hair of the hobbit, he blessed him. ‘Rise now, Meriadoc, esquire of Rohan of the household of Meduseld!’ he said. ‘Take
your sword and bear it unto good fortune!’
‘As a father you shall be to me,’ said Merry.
‘For a little while,’ said Théoden.
´
They talked then together as they ate, until presently Eomer
spoke.
‘It is near the hour that we set for our going, lord,’ he said. ‘Shall I

778

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

bid men sound the horns? But where is Aragorn? His place is empty
and he has not eaten.’
‘We will make ready to ride,’ said Théoden; ‘but let word be sent
to the Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh.’
The king with his guard and Merry at his side passed down from
the gate of the Burg to where the Riders were assembling on the
green. Many were already mounted. It would be a great company;
for the king was leaving only a small garrison in the Burg, and all
who could be spared were riding to the weapontake at Edoras. A
thousand spears had indeed already ridden away at night; but still
there would be some ﬁve hundred more to go with the king, for the
most part men from the ﬁelds and dales of Westfold.
A little apart the Rangers sat, silent, in an ordered company, armed
with spear and bow and sword. They were clad in cloaks of dark
grey, and their hoods were cast now over helm and head. Their horses
were strong and of proud bearing, but rough-haired; and one stood
there without a rider, Aragorn’s own horse that they had brought
from the North; Roheryn was his name. There was no gleam of stone
or gold, nor any fair thing in all their gear and harness; nor did their
riders bear any badge or token, save only that each cloak was pinned
upon the left shoulder by a brooch of silver shaped like a rayed star.
The king mounted his horse, Snowmane, and Merry sat beside
´
him on his pony: Stybba was his name. Presently Eomer
came out
from the gate, and with him was Aragorn, and Halbarad bearing the
great staff close-furled in black, and two tall men, neither young nor
old. So much alike were they, the sons of Elrond, that few could tell
them apart: dark-haired, grey-eyed, and their faces elven-fair, clad
alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver-grey. Behind them walked
Legolas and Gimli. But Merry had eyes only for Aragorn, so startling
was the change that he saw in him, as if in one night many years had
fallen on his head. Grim was his face, grey-hued and weary.
‘I am troubled in mind, lord,’ he said, standing by the king’s horse.
‘I have heard strange words, and I see new perils far off. I have
laboured long in thought, and now I fear that I must change my
purpose. Tell me, Théoden, you ride now to Dunharrow, how long
will it be ere you come there?’
´
‘It is now a full hour past noon,’ said Eomer.
‘Before the night of
the third day from now we should come to the Hold. The Moon will
then be two nights past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the day after. More speed we cannot make, if
the strength of Rohan is to be gathered.’
Aragorn was silent for a moment. ‘Three days,’ he murmured,
‘and the muster of Rohan will only be begun. But I see that it cannot
now be hastened.’ He looked up, and it seemed that he had made

THE PASSING OF THE GREY COMPANY

779

some decision; his face was less troubled. ‘Then, by your leave, lord,
I must take new counsel for myself and my kindred. We must ride
our own road, and no longer in secret. For me the time of stealth
has passed. I will ride east by the swiftest way, and I will take the
Paths of the Dead.’
‘The Paths of the Dead!’ said Théoden, and trembled. ‘Why do
´
you speak of them?’ Eomer
turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it
seemed to Merry that the faces of the Riders that sat within hearing
turned pale at the words. ‘If there be in truth such paths,’ said
Théoden, ‘their gate is in Dunharrow; but no living man may pass
it.’
´
‘Alas! Aragorn my friend!’ said Eomer.
‘I had hoped that we should
ride to war together; but if you seek the Paths of the Dead, then our
parting is come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again
under the Sun.’
‘That road I will take, nonetheless,’ said Aragorn. ‘But I say to
´
you, Eomer,
that in battle we may yet meet again, though all the
hosts of Mordor should stand between.’
‘You will do as you will, my lord Aragorn,’ said Théoden. ‘It is
your doom, maybe, to tread strange paths that others dare not. This
parting grieves me, and my strength is lessened by it; but now I must
take the mountain-roads and delay no longer. Farewell!’
‘Farewell, lord!’ said Aragorn. ‘Ride unto great renown! Farewell,
Merry! I leave you in good hands, better than we hoped when we
hunted the orcs to Fangorn. Legolas and Gimli will still hunt with
me, I hope; but we shall not forget you.’
‘Good-bye!’ said Merry. He could ﬁnd no more to say. He felt
very small, and he was puzzled and depressed by all these gloomy
words. More than ever he missed the unquenchable cheerfulness of
Pippin. The Riders were ready, and their horses were ﬁdgeting; he
wished they would start and get it over.
´
Now Théoden spoke to Eomer,
and he lifted up his hand and
cried aloud, and with that word the Riders set forth. They rode over
the Dike and down the Coomb, and then, turning swiftly eastwards,
they took a path that skirted the foothills for a mile or so, until
bending south it passed back among the hills and disappeared from
view. Aragorn rode to the Dike and watched till the king’s men were
far down the Coomb. Then he turned to Halbarad.
‘There go three that I love, and the smallest not the least,’ he said.
‘He knows not to what end he rides; yet if he knew, he still would
go on.’
‘A little people, but of great worth are the Shire-folk,’ said Halbarad. ‘Little do they know of our long labour for the safekeeping of
their borders, and yet I grudge it not.’

780

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘And now our fates are woven together,’ said Aragorn. ‘And yet,
alas! here we must part. Well, I must eat a little, and then we also
must hasten away. Come, Legolas and Gimli! I must speak with you
as I eat.’
Together they went back into the Burg; yet for some time Aragorn
sat silent at the table in the hall, and the others waited for him to
speak. ‘Come!’ said Legolas at last. ‘Speak and be comforted, and
shake off the shadow! What has happened since we came back to
this grim place in the grey morning?’
‘A struggle somewhat grimmer for my part than the battle of the
Hornburg,’ answered Aragorn. ‘I have looked in the Stone of
Orthanc, my friends.’
‘You have looked in that accursed stone of wizardry!’ exclaimed
Gimli with fear and astonishment in his face. ‘Did you say aught to
– him? Even Gandalf feared that encounter.’
‘You forget to whom you speak,’ said Aragorn sternly, and his
eyes glinted. ‘What do you fear that I should say to him? Did I not
openly proclaim my title before the doors of Edoras? Nay, Gimli,’
he said in a softer voice, and the grimness left his face, and he looked
like one who has laboured in sleepless pain for many nights. ‘Nay,
my friends, I am the lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the
right and the strength to use it, or so I judged. The right cannot be
doubted. The strength was enough – barely.’
He drew a deep breath. ‘It was a bitter struggle, and the weariness
is slow to pass. I spoke no word to him, and in the end I wrenched
the Stone to my own will. That alone he will ﬁnd hard to endure.
And he beheld me. Yes, Master Gimli, he saw me, but in other guise
than you see me here. If that will aid him, then I have done ill. But
I do not think so. To know that I lived and walked the earth was a
blow to his heart, I deem; for he knew it not till now. The eyes in
Orthanc did not see through the armour of Théoden; but Sauron
has not forgotten Isildur and the sword of Elendil. Now in the very
hour of his great designs the heir of Isildur and the Sword are revealed;
for I showed the blade re-forged to him. He is not so mighty yet that
he is above fear; nay, doubt ever gnaws him.’
‘But he wields great dominion, nonetheless,’ said Gimli; ‘and now
he will strike more swiftly.’
‘The hasty stroke goes oft astray,’ said Aragorn. ‘We must press
our Enemy, and no longer wait upon him for the move. See my
friends, when I had mastered the Stone, I learned many things. A
grave peril I saw coming unlooked-for upon Gondor from the South
that will draw off great strength from the defence of Minas Tirith. If
it is not countered swiftly, I deem that the City will be lost ere ten
days be gone.’

THE PASSING OF THE GREY COMPANY

781

‘Then lost it must be,’ said Gimli. ‘For what help is there to send
thither, and how could it come there in time?’
‘I have no help to send, therefore I must go myself,’ said Aragorn.
‘But there is only one way through the mountains that will bring me
to the coastlands before all is lost. That is the Paths of the Dead.’
‘The Paths of the Dead!’ said Gimli. ‘It is a fell name; and little
to the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such
a road and not perish? And even if you pass that way, what will so
few avail to counter the strokes of Mordor?’
‘The living have never used that road since the coming of the
Rohirrim,’ said Aragorn, ‘for it is closed to them. But in this dark
hour the heir of Isildur may use it, if he dare. Listen! This is the
word that the sons of Elrond bring to me from their father in Rivendell, wisest in lore: Bid Aragorn remember the words of the seer, and the
Paths of the Dead.’
‘And what may be the words of the seer?’ said Legolas.
‘Thus spoke Malbeth the Seer, in the days of Arvedui, last king
at Fornost,’ said Aragorn:
Over the land there lies a long shadow,
westward reaching wings of darkness.
The Tower trembles; to the tombs of kings
doom approaches. The Dead awaken;
for the hour is come for the oathbreakers:
at the Stone of Erech they shall stand again
and hear there a horn in the hills ringing.
Whose shall the horn be? Who shall call them
from the grey twilight, the forgotten people?
The heir of him to whom the oath they swore.
From the North shall he come, need shall drive him:
he shall pass the Door to the Paths of the Dead.
‘Dark ways, doubtless,’ said Gimli, ‘but no darker than these staves
are to me.’
‘If you would understand them better, then I bid you come with
me,’ said Aragorn; ‘for that way I now shall take. But I do not go
gladly; only need drives me. Therefore, only of your free will would
I have you come, for you will ﬁnd both toil and great fear, and maybe
worse.’
‘I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever
end they may lead,’ said Gimli.
‘I also will come,’ said Legolas, ‘for I do not fear the Dead.’
‘I hope that the forgotten people will not have forgotten how to

782

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

ﬁght,’ said Gimli; ‘for otherwise I see not why we should trouble
them.’
‘That we shall know if ever we come to Erech,’ said Aragorn. ‘But
the oath that they broke was to ﬁght against Sauron, and they must
ﬁght therefore, if they are to fulﬁl it. For at Erech there stands yet a
black stone that was brought, it was said, from Númenor by Isildur;
and it was set upon a hill, and upon it the King of the Mountains
swore allegiance to him in the beginning of the realm of Gondor.
But when Sauron returned and grew in might again, Isildur summoned the Men of the Mountains to fulﬁl their oath, and they would
not: for they had worshipped Sauron in the Dark Years.
‘Then Isildur said to their king: ‘‘Thou shalt be the last king. And
if the West prove mightier than thy Black Master, this curse I lay
upon thee and thy folk: to rest never until your oath is fulﬁlled. For
this war will last through years uncounted, and you shall be summoned once again ere the end.’’ And they ﬂed before the wrath of
Isildur, and did not dare to go forth to war on Sauron’s part; and
they hid themselves in secret places in the mountains and had no
dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the barren hills. And
the terror of the Sleepless Dead lies about the Hill of Erech and all
places where that people lingered. But that way I must go, since there
are none living to help me.’
He stood up. ‘Come!’ he cried, and drew his sword, and it ﬂashed
in the twilit hall of the Burg. ‘To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths
of the Dead. Come with me who will!’
Legolas and Gimli made no answer, but they rose and followed
Aragorn from the hall. On the green there waited, still and silent, the
hooded Rangers. Legolas and Gimli mounted. Aragorn sprang upon
Roheryn. Then Halbarad lifted a great horn, and the blast of it echoed
in Helm’s Deep: and with that they leapt away, riding down the
Coomb like thunder, while all the men that were left on Dike or Burg
stared in amaze.
And while Théoden went by slow paths in the hills, the Grey
Company passed swiftly over the plain, and on the next day in the
afternoon they came to Edoras; and there they halted only brieﬂy,
ere they passed up the valley, and so came to Dunharrow as darkness
fell.
´
The Lady Eowyn
greeted them and was glad of their coming; for
no mightier men had she seen than the Dúnedain and the fair sons
of Elrond; but on Aragorn most of all her eyes rested. And when
they sat at supper with her, they talked together, and she heard of
all that had passed since Théoden rode away, concerning which only
hasty tidings had yet reached her; and when she heard of the battle

THE PASSING OF THE GREY COMPANY

783

in Helm’s Deep and the great slaughter of their foes, and of the
charge of Théoden and his knights, then her eyes shone.
But at last she said: ‘Lords, you are weary and shall now go to
your beds with such ease as can be contrived in haste. But tomorrow
fairer housing shall be found for you.’
But Aragorn said: ‘Nay, lady, be not troubled for us! If we may
lie here tonight and break our fast tomorrow, it will be enough. For
I ride on an errand most urgent, and with the ﬁrst light of morning
we must go.’
She smiled on him and said: ‘Then it was kindly done, lord, to
´
ride so many miles out of your way to bring tidings to Eowyn,
and
to speak with her in her exile.’
‘Indeed no man would count such a journey wasted,’ said Aragorn;
‘and yet, lady, I could not have come hither, if it were not that the
road which I must take leads me to Dunharrow.’
And she answered as one that likes not what is said: ‘Then, lord,
you are astray; for out of Harrowdale no road runs east or south;
and you had best return as you came.’
‘Nay, lady,’ said he, ‘I am not astray; for I walked in this land ere
you were born to grace it. There is a road out of this valley, and that
road I shall take. Tomorrow I shall ride by the Paths of the Dead.’
Then she stared at him as one that is stricken, and her face
blanched, and for long she spoke no more, while all sat silent. ‘But,
Aragorn,’ she said at last, ‘is it then your errand to seek death? For
that is all that you will ﬁnd on that road. They do not suffer the
living to pass.’
‘They may suffer me to pass,’ said Aragorn; ‘but at the least I will
adventure it. No other road will serve.’
‘But this is madness,’ she said. ‘For here are men of renown and
prowess, whom you should not take into the shadows, but should
lead to war, where men are needed. I beg you to remain and ride
with my brother; for then all our hearts will be gladdened, and our
hope be the brighter.’
‘It is not madness, lady,’ he answered; ‘for I go on a path
appointed. But those who follow me do so of their free will; and if
they wish now to remain and ride with the Rohirrim, they may do
so. But I shall take the Paths of the Dead, alone, if needs be.’
Then they said no more, and they ate in silence; but her eyes were
ever upon Aragorn, and the others saw that she was in great torment
of mind. At length they arose, and took their leave of the Lady, and
thanked her for her care, and went to their rest.
But as Aragorn came to the booth where he was to lodge with
Legolas and Gimli, and his companions had gone in, there came the
´
Lady Eowyn
after him and called to him. He turned and saw her as

784

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

a glimmer in the night, for she was clad in white; but her eyes were
on ﬁre.
‘Aragorn,’ she said, ‘why will you go on this deadly road?’
‘Because I must,’ he said. ‘Only so can I see any hope of doing
my part in the war against Sauron. I do not choose paths of peril,
´
Eowyn.
Were I to go where my heart dwells, far in the North I would
now be wandering in the fair valley of Rivendell.’
For a while she was silent, as if pondering what this might mean.
Then suddenly she laid her hand on his arm. ‘You are a stern lord
and resolute,’ she said; ‘and thus do men win renown.’ She paused.
‘Lord,’ she said, ‘if you must go, then let me ride in your following.
For I am weary of skulking in the hills, and wish to face peril and
battle.’
‘Your duty is with your people,’ he answered.
‘Too often have I heard of duty,’ she cried. ‘But am I not of the
House of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited
on faltering feet long enough. Since they falter no longer, it seems,
may I not now spend my life as I will?’
‘Few may do that with honour,’ he answered. ‘But as for you,
lady: did you not accept the charge to govern the people until their
lord’s return? If you had not been chosen, then some marshal or
captain would have been set in the same place, and he could not ride
away from his charge, were he weary of it or no.’
‘Shall I always be chosen?’ she said bitterly. ‘Shall I always be left
behind when the Riders depart, to mind the house while they win
renown, and ﬁnd food and beds when they return?’
‘A time may come soon,’ said he, ‘when none will return. Then
there will be need of valour without renown, for none shall remember
the deeds that are done in the last defence of your homes. Yet the
deeds will not be less valiant because they are unpraised.’
And she answered: ‘All your words are but to say: you are a woman,
and your part is in the house. But when the men have died in battle
and honour, you have leave to be burned in the house, for the men
will need it no more. But I am of the House of Eorl and not a
serving-woman. I can ride and wield blade, and I do not fear either
pain or death.’
‘What do you fear, lady?’ he asked.
‘A cage,’ she said. ‘To stay behind bars, until use and old age
accept them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond
recall or desire.’
‘And yet you counselled me not to adventure on the road that I
had chosen, because it is perilous?’
‘So may one counsel another,’ she said. ‘Yet I do not bid you ﬂee
from peril, but to ride to battle where your sword may win renown

THE PASSING OF THE GREY COMPANY

785

and victory. I would not see a thing that is high and excellent cast
away needlessly.’
‘Nor would I,’ he said. ‘Therefore I say to you, lady: Stay! For
you have no errand to the South.’
‘Neither have those others who go with thee. They go only because
they would not be parted from thee – because they love thee.’ Then
she turned and vanished into the night.
When the light of day was come into the sky but the sun was not
yet risen above the high ridges in the East, Aragorn made ready to
depart. His company was all mounted, and he was about to leap into
´
the saddle, when the Lady Eowyn
came to bid them farewell. She
was clad as a Rider and girt with a sword. In her hand she bore a
cup, and she set it to her lips and drank a little, wishing them good
speed; and then she gave the cup to Aragorn, and he drank, and he
said: ‘Farewell, Lady of Rohan! I drink to the fortunes of your House,
and of you, and of all your people. Say to your brother: beyond the
shadows we may meet again!’
Then it seemed to Gimli and Legolas who were nearby that she
wept, and in one so stern and proud that seemed the more grievous.
But she said: ‘Aragorn, wilt thou go?’
‘I will,’ he said.
‘Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company, as I have asked?’
‘I will not, lady,’ he said. ‘For that I could not grant without
leave of the king and of your brother; and they will not return until
tomorrow. But I count now every hour, indeed every minute.
Farewell!’
Then she fell on her knees, saying: ‘I beg thee!’
‘Nay, lady,’ he said, and taking her by the hand he raised her.
Then he kissed her hand, and sprang into the saddle, and rode away,
and did not look back; and only those who knew him well and were
near to him saw the pain that he bore.
´
But Eowyn
stood still as a ﬁgure carven in stone, her hands
clenched at her sides, and she watched them until they passed into
the shadows under the black Dwimorberg, the Haunted Mountain,
in which was the Door of the Dead. When they were lost to view,
she turned, stumbling as one that is blind, and went back to her
lodging. But none of her folk saw this parting, for they hid themselves
in fear and would not come forth until the day was up, and the
reckless strangers were gone.
And some said: ‘They are Elvish wights. Let them go where they
belong, into the dark places, and never return. The times are evil
enough.’
*
*
*

786

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The light was still grey as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed
over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before them. A dread
fell on them, even as they passed between the lines of ancient stones
and so came to the Dimholt. There under the gloom of black trees
that not even Legolas could long endure they found a hollow place
opening at the mountain’s root, and right in their path stood a single
mighty stone like a ﬁnger of doom.
‘My blood runs chill,’ said Gimli, but the others were silent, and
his voice fell dead on the dank ﬁr-needles at his feet. The horses
would not pass the threatening stone, until the riders dismounted
and led them about. And so they came at last deep into the glen;
and there stood a sheer wall of rock, and in the wall the Dark Door
gaped before them like the mouth of night. Signs and ﬁgures were
carved above its wide arch too dim to read, and fear ﬂowed from it
like a grey vapour.
The Company halted, and there was not a heart among them that
did not quail, unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for
whom the ghosts of Men have no terror.
‘This is an evil door,’ said Halbarad, ‘and my death lies beyond
it. I will dare to pass it nonetheless; but no horse will enter.’
‘But we must go in, and therefore the horses must go too,’ said
Aragorn. ‘For if ever we come through this darkness, many leagues
lie beyond, and every hour that is lost there will bring the triumph
of Sauron nearer. Follow me!’
Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will
in that hour that all the Dúnedain and their horses followed him.
And indeed the love that the horses of the Rangers bore for their
riders was so great that they were willing to face even the terror of
the Door, if their masters’ hearts were steady as they walked beside
them. But Arod, the horse of Rohan, refused the way, and he stood
sweating and trembling in a fear that was grievous to see. Then
Legolas laid his hands on his eyes and sang some words that went
soft in the gloom, until he suffered himself to be led, and Legolas
passed in. And there stood Gimli the Dwarf left all alone.
His knees shook, and he was wroth with himself. ‘Here is a thing
unheard of !’ he said. ‘An Elf will go underground and a Dwarf dare
not!’ With that he plunged in. But it seemed to him that he dragged
his feet like lead over the threshold; and at once a blindness came
upon him, even upon Gimli Glóin’s son who had walked unafraid
in many deep places of the world.
Aragorn had brought torches from Dunharrow, and now he went
ahead bearing one aloft; and Elladan with another went at the rear,
and Gimli, stumbling behind, strove to overtake him. He could see

THE PASSING OF THE GREY COMPANY

787

nothing but the dim ﬂame of the torches; but if the Company halted,
there seemed an endless whisper of voices all about him, a murmur
of words in no tongue that he had ever heard before.
Nothing assailed the Company nor withstood their passage, and
yet steadily fear grew on the Dwarf as he went on: most of all because
he knew now that there could be no turning back; all the paths behind
were thronged by an unseen host that followed in the dark.
So time unreckoned passed, until Gimli saw a sight that he was
ever afterwards loth to recall. The road was wide, as far as he could
judge, but now the Company came suddenly into a great empty
space, and there were no longer any walls upon either side. The dread
was so heavy on him that he could hardly walk. Away to the left
something glittered in the gloom as Aragorn’s torch drew near. Then
Aragorn halted and went to look what it might be.
‘Does he feel no fear?’ muttered the Dwarf. ‘In any other cave
Gimli Glóin’s son would have been the ﬁrst to run to the gleam of
gold. But not here! Let it lie!’
Nonetheless he drew near, and saw Aragorn kneeling, while Elladan held aloft both torches. Before him were the bones of a mighty
man. He had been clad in mail, and still his harness lay there whole;
for the cavern’s air was as dry as dust, and his hauberk was gilded.
His belt was of gold and garnets, and rich with gold was the helm
upon his bony head face downward on the ﬂoor. He had fallen near
the far wall of the cave, as now could be seen, and before him stood
a stony door closed fast: his ﬁnger-bones were still clawing at the
cracks. A notched and broken sword lay by him, as if he had hewn
at the rock in his last despair.
Aragorn did not touch him, but after gazing silently for a while
he rose and sighed. ‘Hither shall the ﬂowers of simbelmynë come never
unto world’s end,’ he murmured. ‘Nine mounds and seven there are
now green with grass, and through all the long years he has lain at
the door that he could not unlock. Whither does it lead? Why would
he pass? None shall ever know!
‘For that is not my errand!’ he cried, turning back and speaking to
the whispering darkness behind. ‘Keep your hoards and your secrets
hidden in the Accursed Years! Speed only we ask. Let us pass, and
then come! I summon you to the Stone of Erech!’
There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful
than the whispers before; and then a chill blast came in which the
torches ﬂickered and went out, and could not be rekindled. Of the
time that followed, one hour or many, Gimli remembered little.
The others pressed on, but he was ever hindmost, pursued by a
groping horror that seemed always just about to seize him; and a

788

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

rumour came after him like the shadow-sound of many feet. He
stumbled on until he was crawling like a beast on the ground and
felt that he could endure no more: he must either ﬁnd an ending and
escape or run back in madness to meet the following fear.
Suddenly he heard the tinkle of water, a sound hard and clear as
a stone falling into a dream of dark shadow. Light grew, and lo! the
Company passed through another gateway, high-arched and broad,
and a rill ran out beside them; and beyond, going steeply down, was
a road between sheer cliffs, knife-edged against the sky far above. So
deep and narrow was that chasm that the sky was dark, and in it
small stars glinted. Yet as Gimli after learned it was still two hours
ere sunset of the day on which they had set out from Dunharrow;
though for all that he could then tell it might have been twilight in
some later year, or in some other world.
The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas. They rode in ﬁle, and evening came on and a deep blue dusk;
and still fear pursued them. Legolas turning to speak to Gimli looked
back and the Dwarf saw before his face the glitter in the Elf ’s bright
eyes. Behind them rode Elladan, last of the Company, but not the
last of those that took the downward road.
‘The Dead are following,’ said Legolas. ‘I see shapes of Men and
of horses, and pale banners like shreds of cloud, and spears like
winter-thickets on a misty night. The Dead are following.’
‘Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned,’ said
Elladan.
The Company came at last out of the ravine, as suddenly as if
they had issued from a crack in a wall; and there lay the uplands of
a great vale before them, and the stream beside them went down
with a cold voice over many falls.
‘Where in Middle-earth are we?’ said Gimli; and Elladan answered:
‘We have descended from the uprising of the Morthond, the long
chill river that ﬂows at last to the sea that washes the walls of Dol
Amroth. You will not need to ask hereafter how comes its name:
Blackroot men call it.’
The Morthond Vale made a great bay that beat up against the
sheer southern faces of the mountains. Its steep slopes were grassgrown; but all was grey in that hour, for the sun had gone, and far
below lights twinkled in the homes of Men. The vale was rich and
many folk dwelt there.
Then without turning Aragorn cried aloud so that all could hear:
‘Friends, forget your weariness! Ride now, ride! We must come to
the Stone of Erech ere this day passes, and long still is the way.’ So

THE PASSING OF THE GREY COMPANY

789

without looking back they rode the mountain-ﬁelds, until they came
to a bridge over the growing torrent and found a road that went
down into the land.
Lights went out in house and hamlet as they came, and doors
were shut, and folk that were aﬁeld cried in terror and ran wild like
hunted deer. Ever there rose the same cry in the gathering night:
‘The King of the Dead ! The King of the Dead is come upon us!’
Bells were ringing far below, and all men ﬂed before the face of
Aragorn; but the Grey Company in their haste rode like hunters,
until their horses were stumbling with weariness. And thus, just ere
midnight, and in a darkness as black as the caverns in the mountains,
they came at last to the Hill of Erech.
Long had the terror of the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the
empty ﬁelds about it. For upon the top stood a black stone, round
as a great globe, the height of a man, though its half was buried in
the ground. Unearthly it looked, as though it had fallen from the
sky, as some believed; but those who remembered still the lore of
Westernesse told that it had been brought out of the ruin of Númenor
and there set by Isildur at his landing. None of the people of the
valley dared to approach it, nor would they dwell near; for they said
that it was a trysting-place of the Shadow-men and there they would
gather in times of fear, thronging round the Stone and whispering.
To that Stone the Company came and halted in the dead of night.
Then Elrohir gave to Aragorn a silver horn, and he blew upon it;
and it seemed to those that stood near that they heard a sound of
answering horns, as if it was an echo in deep caves far away. No
other sound they heard, and yet they were aware of a great host
gathered all about the hill on which they stood; and a chill wind like
the breath of ghosts came down from the mountains. But Aragorn
dismounted, and standing by the Stone he cried in a great voice:
‘Oathbreakers, why have ye come?’
And a voice was heard out of the night that answered him, as if
from far away:
‘To fulﬁl our oath and have peace.’
Then Aragorn said: ‘The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir
upon Anduin, and ye shall come after me. And when all this land is
clean of the servants of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulﬁlled, and ye
shall have peace and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur’s heir
of Gondor.’
And with that he bade Halbarad unfurl the great standard which
he had brought; and behold! it was black, and if there was any device
upon it, it was hidden in the darkness. Then there was silence, and
not a whisper nor a sigh was heard again all the long night. The

790

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Company camped beside the Stone, but they slept little, because of
the dread of the Shadows that hedged them round.
But when the dawn came, cold and pale, Aragorn rose at once,
and he led the Company forth upon the journey of greatest haste
and weariness that any among them had known, save he alone, and
only his will held them to go on. No other mortal Men could have
endured it, none but the Dúnedain of the North, and with them
Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves.
They passed Tarlang’s Neck and came into Lamedon; and the
Shadow Host pressed behind and fear went on before them, until
they came to Calembel upon Ciril, and the sun went down like blood
behind Pinnath Gelin away in the West behind them. The township
and the fords of Ciril they found deserted, for many men had gone
away to war, and all that were left ﬂed to the hills at the rumour of
the coming of the King of the Dead. But the next day there came
no dawn, and the Grey Company passed on into the darkness of the
Storm of Mordor and were lost to mortal sight; but the Dead followed
them.

Chapter 3
THE MUSTER OF ROHAN
Now all roads were running together to the East to meet the coming
of war and the onset of the Shadow. And even as Pippin stood at
the Great Gate of the City and saw the Prince of Dol Amroth ride
in with his banners, the King of Rohan came down out of the hills.
Day was waning. In the last rays of the sun the Riders cast long
pointed shadows that went on before them. Darkness had already
crept beneath the murmuring ﬁr-woods that clothed the steep mountain-sides. The king rode now slowly at the end of the day. Presently
the path turned round a huge bare shoulder of rock and plunged into
the gloom of soft-sighing trees. Down, down they went in a long
winding ﬁle. When at last they came to the bottom of the gorge they
found that evening had fallen in the deep places. The sun was gone.
Twilight lay upon the waterfalls.
All day far below them a leaping stream had run down from
the high pass behind, cleaving its narrow way between pine-clad
walls; and now through a stony gate it ﬂowed out and passed into a
wider vale. The Riders followed it, and suddenly Harrowdale lay
before them, loud with the noise of waters in the evening. There
the white Snowbourn, joined by the lesser stream, went rushing,
fuming on the stones, down to Edoras and the green hills and the
plains. Away to the right at the head of the great dale the mighty
Starkhorn loomed up above its vast buttresses swathed in cloud; but
its jagged peak, clothed in everlasting snow, gleamed far above the
world, blue-shadowed upon the East, red-stained by the sunset in
the West.
Merry looked out in wonder upon this strange country, of which
he had heard many tales upon their long road. It was a skyless world,
in which his eye, through dim gulfs of shadowy air, saw only evermounting slopes, great walls of stone behind great walls, and frowning
precipices wreathed with mist. He sat for a moment half dreaming,
listening to the noise of water, the whisper of dark trees, the crack
of stone, and the vast waiting silence that brooded behind all sound.
He loved mountains, or he had loved the thought of them marching
on the edge of stories brought from far away; but now he was borne
down by the insupportable weight of Middle-earth. He longed to
shut out the immensity in a quiet room by a ﬁre.
He was very tired, for though they had ridden slowly, they had
ridden with very little rest. Hour after hour for nearly three weary

792

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

days he had jogged up and down, over passes, and through long dales,
and across many streams. Sometimes where the way was broader he
had ridden at the king’s side, not noticing that many of the Riders
smiled to see the two together: the hobbit on his little shaggy grey
pony, and the Lord of Rohan on his great white horse. Then he had
talked to Théoden, telling him about his home and the doings of the
Shire-folk, or listening in turn to tales of the Mark and its mighty
men of old. But most of the time, especially on this last day, Merry
had ridden by himself just behind the king, saying nothing, and trying
to understand the slow sonorous speech of Rohan that he heard the
men behind him using. It was a language in which there seemed to
be many words that he knew, though spoken more richly and strongly
than in the Shire, yet he could not piece the words together. At times
some Rider would lift up his clear voice in stirring song, and Merry
felt his heart leap, though he did not know what it was about.
All the same he had been lonely, and never more so than now at
the day’s end. He wondered where in all this strange world Pippin
had got to; and what would become of Aragorn and Legolas and
Gimli. Then suddenly like a cold touch on his heart he thought of
Frodo and Sam. ‘I am forgetting them!’ he said to himself reproachfully. ‘And yet they are more important than all the rest of us. And
I came to help them; but now they must be hundreds of miles away,
if they are still alive.’ He shivered.
´
‘Harrowdale at last!’ said Eomer.
‘Our journey is almost at an
end.’ They halted. The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply.
Only a glimpse, as through a tall window, could be seen of the great
valley in the gloaming below. A single small light could be seen
twinkling by the river.
‘This journey is over, maybe,’ said Théoden, ‘but I have far yet
to go. Two nights ago the moon was full, and in the morning I shall
ride to Edoras to the gathering of the Mark.’
´
‘But if you would take my counsel,’ said Eomer
in a low voice,
‘you would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.’
Théoden smiled. ‘Nay, my son, for so I will call you, speak not
the soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears!’ He drew himself up
and looked back at the long line of his men fading into the dusk
behind. ‘Long years in the space of days it seems since I rode west;
but never will I lean on a staff again. If the war is lost, what good
will be my hiding in the hills? And if it is won, what grief will it be,
even if I fall, spending my last strength? But we will leave this now.
Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow. One evening of peace
at least is left us. Let us ride on!’
*
*
*

796

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Tell me, did he speak of that road?’ He pointed away along the
darkening lines of stones towards the Dwimorberg. ‘Of the Paths of
the Dead?’
´
‘Yes, lord,’ said Eowyn.
‘And he has passed into the shadow from
which none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.’
´
‘Then our paths are sundered,’ said Eomer.
‘He is lost. We must
ride without him, and our hope dwindles.’
Slowly they passed through the short heath and upland grass,
speaking no more, until they came to the king’s pavilion. There Merry
found that everything was made ready, and that he himself was not
forgotten. A little tent had been pitched for him beside the king’s
lodging; and there he sat alone, while men passed to and fro, going
in to the king and taking counsel with him. Night came on and the
half-seen heads of the mountains westward were crowned with stars,
but the East was dark and blank. The marching stones faded slowly
from sight, but still beyond them, blacker than the gloom, brooded
the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg.
‘The Paths of the Dead,’ he muttered to himself. ‘The Paths of
the Dead? What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They
have all gone to some doom: Gandalf and Pippin to war in the East;
and Sam and Frodo to Mordor; and Strider and Legolas and Gimli
to the Paths of the Dead. But my turn will come soon enough, I
suppose. I wonder what they are all talking about, and what the king
means to do. For I must go where he goes now.’
In the midst of these gloomy thoughts he suddenly remembered
that he was very hungry, and he got up to go and see if anyone else
in this strange camp felt the same. But at that very moment a trumpet
sounded, and a man came summoning him, the king’s esquire, to
wait at the king’s board.
In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space, curtained off
with broidered hangings, and strewn with skins; and there at a small
´
´
table sat Théoden with Eomer
and Eowyn,
and Dúnhere, lord of
Harrowdale. Merry stood beside the king’s stool and waited on him,
till presently the old man, coming out of deep thought, turned to
him and smiled.
‘Come, Master Meriadoc!’ he said. ‘You shall not stand. You shall
sit beside me, as long as I remain in my own lands, and lighten my
heart with tales.’
Room was made for the hobbit at the king’s left hand, but no one
called for any tale. There was indeed little speech, and they ate and
drank for the most part in silence, until at last, plucking up courage,
Merry asked the question that was tormenting him.

848

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

seemed to them that their own ships should be ﬁlled with their foes;
and a black dread fell on them, knowing that the tides of fate had
turned against them and their doom was at hand.
East rode the knights of Dol Amroth driving the enemy before
them: troll-men and Variags and orcs that hated the sunlight. South
´
strode Eomer
and men ﬂed before his face, and they were caught
between the hammer and the anvil. For now men leaped from the
ships to the quays of the Harlond and swept north like a storm. There
came Legolas, and Gimli wielding his axe, and Halbarad with the
standard, and Elladan and Elrohir with stars on their brow, and the
dour-handed Dúnedain, Rangers of the North, leading a great valour
of the folk of Lebennin and Lamedon and the ﬁefs of the South. But
before all went Aragorn with the Flame of the West, Andúril like a
new ﬁre kindled, Narsil re-forged as deadly as of old; and upon his
brow was the Star of Elendil.
´
And so at length Eomer
and Aragorn met in the midst of the
battle, and they leaned on their swords and looked on one another
and were glad.
‘Thus we meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor lay between
us,’ said Aragorn. ‘Did I not say so at the Hornburg?’
´
‘So you spoke,’ said Eomer,
‘but hope oft deceives, and I knew not
then that you were a man foresighted. Yet twice blessed is help
unlooked for, and never was a meeting of friends more joyful.’ And they
´
clasped hand in hand. ‘Nor indeed more timely,’ said Eomer.
‘You
come none too soon, my friend. Much loss and sorrow has befallen us.’
‘Then let us avenge it, ere we speak of it!’ said Aragorn, and they
rode back to battle together.
Hard ﬁghting and long labour they had still; for the Southrons
were bold men and grim, and ﬁerce in despair; and the Easterlings
were strong and war-hardened and asked for no quarter. And so in
this place and that, by burned homestead or barn, upon hillock or
mound, under wall or on ﬁeld, still they gathered and rallied and
fought until the day wore away.
Then the Sun went at last behind Mindolluin and ﬁlled all the
sky with a great burning, so that the hills and the mountains were
dyed as with blood; ﬁre glowed in the River, and the grass of the
Pelennor lay red in the nightfall. And in that hour the great Battle
of the ﬁeld of Gondor was over; and not one living foe was left within
the circuit of the Rammas. All were slain save those who ﬂed to die,
or to drown in the red foam of the River. Few ever came eastward
to Morgul or Mordor; and to the land of the Haradrim came only a
tale from far off: a rumour of the wrath and terror of Gondor.
*
*
*

Chapter 9
THE LAST DEBATE
The morning came after the day of battle, and it was fair with light
clouds and the wind turning westward. Legolas and Gimli were early
abroad, and they begged leave to go up into the City; for they were
eager to see Merry and Pippin.
‘It is good to learn that they are still alive,’ said Gimli; ‘for they
cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have
such pains all wasted.’
Together the Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk
that saw them pass marvelled to see such companions; for Legolas was
fair of face beyond the measure of Men, and he sang an elven-song in
a clear voice as he walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked beside
him, stroking his beard and staring about him.
‘There is some good stone-work here,’ he said as he looked at the
walls; ‘but also some that is less good, and the streets could be better
contrived. When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer him the
service of stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a
town to be proud of.’
‘They need more gardens,’ said Legolas. ‘The houses are dead,
and there is too little here that grows and is glad. If Aragorn comes
into his own, the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing
and trees that do not die.’
At length they came to the Prince Imrahil, and Legolas looked at
him and bowed low; for he saw that here indeed was one who had
elven-blood in his veins. ‘Hail, lord!’ he said. ‘It is long since the
people of Nimrodel left the woodlands of Lórien, and yet still one
may see that not all sailed from Amroth’s haven west over water.’
‘So it is said in the lore of my land,’ said the Prince; ‘yet never
has one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And
I marvel to see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war. What
do you seek?’
‘I am one of the Nine Companions who set out with Mithrandir
from Imladris,’ said Legolas; ‘and with this Dwarf, my friend, I came
with the Lord Aragorn. But now we wish to see our friends, Meriadoc
and Peregrin, who are in your keeping, we are told.’
‘You will ﬁnd them in the Houses of Healing, and I will lead you
thither,’ said Imrahil.
‘It will be enough if you send one to guide us, lord,’ said Legolas.

THE LAST DEBATE

873

‘For Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish to enter
the City again at this time. Yet there is need for the captains to hold
´
council at once, and he prays that you and Eomer
of Rohan will
come down to his tents, as soon as may be. Mithrandir is already
there.’
‘We will come,’ said Imrahil; and they parted with courteous
words.
‘That is a fair lord and a great captain of men,’ said Legolas. ‘If
Gondor has such men still in these days of fading, great must have
been its glory in the days of its rising.’
‘And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and was wrought
in the ﬁrst building,’ said Gimli. ‘It is ever so with the things that
Men begin: there is a frost in Spring, or a blight in Summer, and
they fail of their promise.’
‘Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,’ said Legolas. ‘And that
will lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places
unlooked-for. The deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.’
‘And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess,’
said the Dwarf.
‘To that the Elves know not the answer,’ said Legolas.
With that the servant of the Prince came and led them to the
Houses of Healing; and there they found their friends in the garden,
and their meeting was a merry one. For a while they walked and
talked, rejoicing for a brief space in peace and rest under the morning
high up in the windy circles of the City. Then when Merry became
weary, they went and sat upon the wall with the greensward of the
Houses of Healing behind them; and away southward before them
was the Anduin glittering in the sun, as it ﬂowed away, out of the
sight even of Legolas, into the wide ﬂats and green haze of Lebennin
and South Ithilien.
And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked
out against the sun, and as he gazed he saw white sea-birds beating
up the River.
‘Look!’ he cried. ‘Gulls! They are ﬂying far inland. A wonder they
are to me and a trouble to my heart. Never in all my life had I met
them, until we came to Pelargir, and there I heard them crying in
the air as we rode to the battle of the ships. Then I stood still,
forgetting war in Middle-earth; for their wailing voices spoke to me
of the Sea. The Sea! Alas! I have not yet beheld it. But deep in the
hearts of all my kindred lies the sea-longing, which it is perilous to
stir. Alas! for the gulls. No peace shall I have again under beech or
under elm.’
‘Say not so!’ said Gimli. ‘There are countless things still to see in

874

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Middle-earth, and great works to do. But if all the fair folk take to
the Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to
stay.’
‘Dull and dreary indeed!’ said Merry. ‘You must not go to the
Havens, Legolas. There will always be some folk, big or little, and
even a few wise dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I hope
so. Though I feel somehow that the worst of this war is still to come.
How I wish it was all over, and well over!’
‘Don’t be so gloomy!’ cried Pippin. ‘The Sun is shining, and here
we are together for a day or two at least. I want to hear more about
you all. Come, Gimli! You and Legolas have mentioned your strange
journey with Strider about a dozen times already this morning. But
you haven’t told me anything about it.’
‘The Sun may shine here,’ said Gimli, ‘but there are memories of
that road that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness. Had I
known what was before me, I think that not for any friendship would
I have taken the Paths of the Dead.’
‘The Paths of the Dead?’ said Pippin. ‘I heard Aragorn say that,
and I wondered what he could mean. Won’t you tell us some more?’
‘Not willingly,’ said Gimli. ‘For upon that road I was put to shame:
Gimli Glóin’s son, who had deemed himself more tough than Men,
and hardier under earth than any Elf. But neither did I prove; and I
was held to the road only by the will of Aragorn.’
‘And by the love of him also,’ said Legolas. ‘For all those who
come to know him come to love him after their own fashion, even
the cold maiden of the Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere
you came there, Merry, that we left Dunharrow, and such a fear was
on all the folk that none would look on our going, save the Lady
Éowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There was grief at
that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.’
‘Alas! I had heart only for myself,’ said Gimli. ‘Nay! I will not
speak of that journey.’
He fell silent; but Pippin and Merry were so eager for news that
at last Legolas said: ‘I will tell you enough for your peace; for I felt
not the horror, and I feared not the shadows of Men, powerless and
frail as I deemed them.’
Swiftly then he told of the haunted road under the mountains,
and the dark tryst at Erech, and the great ride thence, ninety leagues
and three, to Pelargir on Anduin. ‘Four days and nights, and on into
a ﬁfth, we rode from the Black Stone,’ he said. ‘And lo! in the darkness
of Mordor my hope rose; for in that gloom the Shadow Host seemed
to grow stronger and more terrible to look upon. Some I saw riding,
some striding, yet all moving with the same great speed. Silent they
were, but there was a gleam in their eyes. In the uplands of Lamedon

THE LAST DEBATE

875

they overtook our horses, and swept round us, and would have passed
us by, if Aragorn had not forbidden them.
‘At his command they fell back. ‘‘Even the shades of Men are
obedient to his will,’’ I thought. ‘‘They may serve his needs yet!’’
‘One day of light we rode, and then came the day without dawn,
and still we rode on, and Ciril and Ringló we crossed; and on the
third day we came to Linhir above the mouth of Gilrain. And there
men of Lamedon contested the fords with fell folk of Umbar and
Harad who had sailed up the river. But defenders and foes alike gave
up the battle and ﬂed when we came, crying out that the King of the
Dead was upon them. Only Angbor, Lord of Lamedon, had the heart
to abide us; and Aragorn bade him gather his folk and come behind,
if they dared, when the Grey Host had passed.
‘ ‘‘At Pelargir the Heir of Isildur will have need of you,’’ he said.
‘Thus we crossed over Gilrain, driving the allies of Mordor in rout
before us; and then we rested a while. But soon Aragorn arose, saying:
‘‘Lo! already Minas Tirith is assailed. I fear that it will fall ere we
come to its aid.’’ So we mounted again before night had passed and
went on with all the speed that our horses could endure over the
plains of Lebennin.’
Legolas paused and sighed, and turning his eyes southward softly
he sang:
Silver ﬂow the streams from Celos to Erui
In the green ﬁelds of Lebennin!
Tall grows the grass there. In the wind from the Sea
The white lilies sway,
And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alﬁrin
In the green ﬁelds of Lebennin,
In the wind from the Sea!
‘Green are those ﬁelds in the songs of my people; but they were
dark then, grey wastes in the blackness before us. And over the wide
land, trampling unheeded the grass and the ﬂowers, we hunted our
foes through a day and a night, until we came at the bitter end to
the Great River at last.
‘Then I thought in my heart that we drew near to the Sea; for
wide was the water in the darkness, and sea-birds innumerable cried
on its shores. Alas for the wailing of the gulls! Did not the Lady tell
me to beware of them? And now I cannot forget them.’
‘For my part I heeded them not,’ said Gimli; ‘for we came then
at last upon battle in earnest. There at Pelargir lay the main ﬂeet of
Umbar, ﬁfty great ships and smaller vessels beyond count. Many of
those that we pursued had reached the havens before us, and brought

876

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

their fear with them; and some of the ships had put off, seeking to
escape down the River or to reach the far shore; and many of the
smaller craft were ablaze. But the Haradrim, being now driven to the
brink, turned at bay, and they were ﬁerce in despair; and they laughed
when they looked on us, for they were a great army still.
‘But Aragorn halted and cried with a great voice: ‘‘Now come! By
the Black Stone I call you!’’ And suddenly the Shadow Host that
had hung back at the last came up like a grey tide, sweeping all away
before it. Faint cries I heard, and dim horns blowing, and a murmur
as of countless far voices: it was like the echo of some forgotten battle
in the Dark Years long ago. Pale swords were drawn; but I know not
whether their blades would still bite, for the Dead needed no longer
any weapon but fear. None would withstand them.
‘To every ship they came that was drawn up, and then they passed
over the water to those that were anchored; and all the mariners were
ﬁlled with a madness of terror and leaped overboard, save the slaves
chained to the oars. Reckless we rode among our ﬂeeing foes, driving
them like leaves, until we came to the shore. And then to each of
the great ships that remained Aragorn sent one of the Dúnedain, and
they comforted the captives that were aboard, and bade them put
aside fear and be free.
‘Ere that dark day ended none of the enemy were left to resist us;
all were drowned, or were ﬂying south in the hope to ﬁnd their own
lands upon foot. Strange and wonderful I thought it that the designs
of Mordor should be overthrown by such wraiths of fear and darkness.
With its own weapons was it worsted!’
‘Strange indeed,’ said Legolas. ‘In that hour I looked on Aragorn
and thought how great and terrible a Lord he might have become in
the strength of his will, had he taken the Ring to himself. Not for
naught does Mordor fear him. But nobler is his spirit than the understanding of Sauron; for is he not of the children of Lúthien? Never
shall that line fail, though the years may lengthen beyond count.’
‘Beyond the eyes of the Dwarves are such foretellings,’ said Gimli.
‘But mighty indeed was Aragorn that day. Lo! all the black ﬂeet was
in his hands; and he chose the greatest ship to be his own, and he
went up into it. Then he let sound a great concourse of trumpets
taken from the enemy; and the Shadow Host withdrew to the shore.
There they stood silent, hardly to be seen, save for a red gleam in
their eyes that caught the glare of the ships that were burning. And
Aragorn spoke in a loud voice to the Dead Men, crying:
‘ ‘‘Hear now the words of the Heir of Isildur! Your oath is fulﬁlled.
Go back and trouble not the valleys ever again! Depart and be at
rest!’’
‘And thereupon the King of the Dead stood out before the host

THE LAST DEBATE

877

and broke his spear and cast it down. Then he bowed low and turned
away; and swiftly the whole grey host drew off and vanished like a
mist that is driven back by a sudden wind; and it seemed to me that
I awoke from a dream.
‘That night we rested while others laboured. For there were many
captives set free, and many slaves released who had been folk of
Gondor taken in raids; and soon also there was a great gathering of
men out of Lebennin and the Ethir, and Angbor of Lamedon came
up with all the horsemen that he could muster. Now that the fear of
the Dead was removed they came to aid us and to look on the Heir
of Isildur; for the rumour of that name had run like ﬁre in the dark.
‘And that is near the end of our tale. For during that evening and
night many ships were made ready and manned; and in the morning
the ﬂeet set forth. Long past it now seems, yet it was but the morn
of the day ere yesterday, the sixth since we rode from Dunharrow.
But still Aragorn was driven by fear that time was too short.
‘ ‘‘It is forty leagues and two from Pelargir to the landings at the
Harlond,’’ he said. ‘‘Yet to the Harlond we must come tomorrow or
fail utterly.’’
‘The oars were now wielded by free men, and manfully they
laboured; yet slowly we passed up the Great River, for we strove
against its stream, and though that is not swift down in the South,
we had no help of wind. Heavy would my heart have been, for all
our victory at the havens, if Legolas had not laughed suddenly.
‘ ‘‘Up with your beard, Durin’s son!’’ he said. ‘‘For thus is it
spoken: Oft hope is born, when all is forlorn.’’ But what hope he saw
from afar he would not tell. When night came it did but deepen the
darkness, and our hearts were hot, for away in the North we saw
a red glow under the cloud, and Aragorn said: ‘‘Minas Tirith is
burning.’’
‘But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea-crafty men of
the Ethir gazing southward spoke of a change coming with a fresh
wind from the Sea. Long ere day the masted ships hoisted sail, and
our speed grew, until dawn whitened the foam at our prows. And so
it was, as you know, that we came in the third hour of the morning
with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled, and we unfurled the great
standard in battle. It was a great day and a great hour, whatever may
come after.’
‘Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,’ said
Legolas. ‘Great deed was the riding of the Paths of the Dead, and
great it shall remain, though none be left in Gondor to sing of it in
the days that are to come.’
‘And that may well befall,’ said Gimli. ‘For the faces of Aragorn
and Gandalf are grave. Much I wonder what counsels they are taking

878

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in the tents there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with
our victory the war was now over. Yet whatever is still to do, I hope
to have a part in it, for the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.’
‘And I for the folk of the Great Wood,’ said Legolas, ‘and for the
love of the Lord of the White Tree.’
Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the
high place, each busy with his own thoughts, while the Captains
debated.
When the Prince Imrahil had parted from Legolas and Gimli, at
´
once he sent for Eomer;
and he went down with him from the City,
and they came to the tents of Aragorn that were set up on the ﬁeld
not far from the place where King Théoden had fallen. And there
they took counsel together with Gandalf and Aragorn and the sons
of Elrond.
‘My lords,’ said Gandalf, ‘listen to the words of the Steward of
Gondor before he died: You may triumph on the ﬁelds of the Pelennor
for a day, but against the Power that has now arisen there is no victory.
I do not bid you despair, as he did, but to ponder the truth in these
words.
‘The Stones of Seeing do not lie, and not even the Lord of Baraddûr can make them do so. He can, maybe, by his will choose what
things shall be seen by weaker minds, or cause them to mistake the
meaning of what they see. Nonetheless it cannot be doubted that
when Denethor saw great forces arrayed against him in Mordor, and
more still being gathered, he saw that which truly is.
‘Hardly has our strength sufﬁced to beat off the ﬁrst great assault.
The next will be greater. This war then is without ﬁnal hope, as
Denethor perceived. Victory cannot be achieved by arms, whether
you sit here to endure siege after siege, or march out to be overwhelmed beyond the River. You have only a choice of evils; and
prudence would counsel you to strengthen such strong places as you
have, and there await the onset; for so shall the time before your end
be made a little longer.’
‘Then you would have us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol Amroth,
or to Dunharrow, and there sit like children on sand-castles when
the tide is ﬂowing?’ said Imrahil.
‘That would be no new counsel,’ said Gandalf. ‘Have you not
done this and little more in all the days of Denethor? But no! I said
this would be prudent. I do not counsel prudence. I said victory
could not be achieved by arms. I still hope for victory, but not by
arms. For into the midst of all these policies comes the Ring of Power,
the foundation of Barad-dûr, and the hope of Sauron.
‘Concerning this thing, my lords, you now all know enough for

Chapter 10
THE BLACK GATE OPENS
Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the
Pelennor. The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of
Anórien, but harried and scattered by the Rohirrim they had broken
and ﬂed with little ﬁghting towards Cair Andros; and with that threat
destroyed and new strength arriving out of the South the City was
as well manned as might be. Scouts reported that no enemies
remained upon the roads east as far as the Cross-roads of the Fallen
King. All now was ready for the last throw.
Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of
Aragorn and Gandalf, who went in the van with the Dúnedain and
the sons of Elrond. But Merry to his shame was not to go with them.
‘You are not ﬁt for such a journey,’ said Aragorn. ‘But do not be
ashamed. If you do no more in this war, you have already earned
great honour. Peregrin shall go and represent the Shire-folk; and do
not grudge him his chance of peril, for though he has done as well
as his fortune allowed him, he has yet to match your deed. But in
truth all now are in like danger. Though it may be our part to ﬁnd
a bitter end before the Gate of Mordor, if we do so, then you will
come also to a last stand, either here or wherever the black tide
overtakes you. Farewell!’
And so despondently Merry now stood and watched the mustering
of the army. Bergil was with him, and he also was downcast; for his
father was to march leading a company of the Men of the City: he
could not rejoin the Guard until his case was judged. In that same
company Pippin was also to go, as a soldier of Gondor. Merry could
see him not far off, a small but upright ﬁgure among the tall men of
Minas Tirith.
At last the trumpets rang and the army began to move. Troop by
troop, and company by company, they wheeled and went off eastward. And long after they had passed away out of sight down the
great road to the Causeway, Merry stood there. The last glint of the
morning sun on spear and helm twinkled and was lost, and still he
remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling friendless and
alone. Everyone that he cared for had gone away into the gloom that
hung over the distant eastern sky; and little hope at all was left in his
heart that he would ever see any of them again.
As if recalled by his mood of despair, the pain in his arm returned,

886

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

had waylaid the men of Harad, and the road went in a deep cutting
through an out-thrust of the eastward hills. But the Captains of the
West were well warned by their scouts, skilled men from Henneth
Annûn led by Mablung; and so the ambush was itself trapped. For
horsemen went wide about westward and came up on the ﬂank of
the enemy and from behind, and they were destroyed or driven east
into the hills.
But the victory did little to enhearten the captains. ‘It is but a
feint,’ said Aragorn; ‘and its chief purpose, I deem, was rather to
draw us on by a false guess of our Enemy’s weakness than to do us
much hurt, yet.’ And from that evening onward the Nazgûl came
and followed every move of the army. They still ﬂew high and out
of sight of all save Legolas, and yet their presence could be felt, as a
deepening of shadow and a dimming of the sun; and though the
Ringwraiths did not yet stoop low upon their foes and were silent,
uttering no cry, the dread of them could not be shaken off.
So time and the hopeless journey wore away. Upon the fourth day
from the Cross-roads and the sixth from Minas Tirith they came at
last to the end of the living lands, and began to pass into the desolation
that lay before the gates of the Pass of Cirith Gorgor; and they could
descry the marshes and the desert that stretched north and west to
the Emyn Muil. So desolate were those places and so deep the horror
that lay on them that some of the host were unmanned, and they
could neither walk nor ride further north.
Aragorn looked at them, and there was pity in his eyes rather than
wrath; for these were young men from Rohan, from Westfold far
away, or husbandmen from Lossarnach, and to them Mordor had
been from childhood a name of evil, and yet unreal, a legend that
had no part in their simple life; and now they walked like men in a
hideous dream made true, and they understood not this war nor why
fate should lead them to such a pass.
‘Go!’ said Aragorn. ‘But keep what honour you may, and do not
run! And there is a task which you may attempt and so be not wholly
shamed. Take your way south-west till you come to Cair Andros,
and if that is still held by enemies, as I think, then re-take it, if you
can; and hold it to the last in defence of Gondor and Rohan!’
Then some being shamed by his mercy overcame their fear and
went on, and the others took new hope, hearing of a manful deed
within their measure that they could turn to, and they departed. And
so, since many men had already been left at the Cross-roads, it was
with less than six thousands that the Captains of the West came at
last to challenge the Black Gate and the might of Mordor.
*
*
*

888

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

trumpeters. There was Gandalf as chief herald, and Aragorn with
´
the sons of Elrond, and Eomer
of Rohan, and Imrahil; and Legolas
and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to go also, so that all the enemies
of Mordor should have a witness.
They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner,
and blew upon their trumpets; and the heralds stood out and sent
their voices up over the battlement of Mordor.
‘Come forth!’ they cried. ‘Let the Lord of the Black Land come
forth! Justice shall be done upon him. For wrongfully he has made war
upon Gondor and wrested its lands. Therefore the King of Gondor
demands that he should atone for his evils, and depart then for ever.
Come forth!’
There was a long silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound
was heard in answer. But Sauron had already laid his plans, and he
had a mind ﬁrst to play these mice cruelly before he struck to kill.
So it was that, even as the Captains were about to turn away, the
silence was broken suddenly. There came a long rolling of great
drums like thunder in the mountains, and then a braying of horns
that shook the very stones and stunned men’s ears. And thereupon
the door of the Black Gate was thrown open with a great clang, and
out of it there came an embassy from the Dark Tower.
At its head there rode a tall and evil shape, mounted upon a black
horse, if horse it was; for it was huge and hideous, and its face was
a frightful mask, more like a skull than a living head, and in the
sockets of its eyes and in its nostrils there burned a ﬂame. The rider
was robed all in black, and black was his lofty helm; yet this was no
Ringwraith but a living man. The Lieutenant of the Tower of Baraddûr he was, and his name is remembered in no tale; for he himself
had forgotten it, and he said: ‘I am the Mouth of Sauron.’ But it is
told that he was a renegade, who came of the race of those that are
named the Black Númenóreans; for they established their dwellings
in Middle-earth during the years of Sauron’s domination, and they
worshipped him, being enamoured of evil knowledge. And he entered
the service of the Dark Tower when it ﬁrst rose again, and because
of his cunning he grew ever higher in the Lord’s favour; and he
learned great sorcery, and knew much of the mind of Sauron; and
he was more cruel than any orc.
He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small
company of black-harnessed soldiery, and a single banner, black but
bearing on it in red the Evil Eye. Now halting a few paces before the
Captains of the West he looked them up and down and laughed.
‘Is there anyone in this rout with authority to treat with me?’ he
asked. ‘Or indeed with wit to understand me? Not thou at least!’ he
mocked, turning to Aragorn with scorn. ‘It needs more to make a

954

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Yes, Sam, Strider,’ said Aragorn. ‘It is a long way, is it not, from
Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all,
but yours has been the darkest road.’
And then to Sam’s surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee
before them; and taking them by the hand, Frodo upon his right and
Sam upon his left, he led them to the throne, and setting them upon
it, he turned to the men and captains who stood by and spoke, so
that his voice rang over all the host, crying:
‘Praise them with great praise!’
And when the glad shout had swelled up and died away again, to
Sam’s ﬁnal and complete satisfaction and pure joy, a minstrel of
Gondor stood forth, and knelt, and begged leave to sing. And behold!
he said:
‘Lo! lords and knights and men of valour unashamed, kings and
princes, and fair people of Gondor, and Riders of Rohan, and ye
sons of Elrond, and Dúnedain of the North, and Elf and Dwarf, and
greathearts of the Shire, and all free folk of the West, now listen to
my lay. For I will sing to you of Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the
Ring of Doom.’
And when Sam heard that he laughed aloud for sheer delight, and
he stood up and cried: ‘O great glory and splendour! And all my
wishes have come true!’ And then he wept.
And all the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their
merriment and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver
and gold, and all men were hushed. And he sang to them, now in
the elven-tongue, now in the speech of the West, until their hearts,
wounded with sweet words, overﬂowed, and their joy was like swords,
and they passed in thought out to regions where pain and delight
ﬂow together and tears are the very wine of blessedness.
And at the last, as the Sun fell from the noon and the shadows of
the trees lengthened, he ended. ‘Praise them with great praise!’ he
said and knelt. And then Aragorn stood up, and all the host arose,
and they passed to pavilions made ready, to eat and drink and make
merry while the day lasted.
Frodo and Sam were led apart and brought to a tent, and there
their old raiment was taken off, but folded and set aside with honour;
and clean linen was given to them. Then Gandalf came and in his
arms, to the wonder of Frodo, he bore the sword and the elven-cloak
and the mithril-coat that had been taken from him in Mordor. For
Sam he brought a coat of gilded mail, and his elven-cloak all healed
of the soils and hurts that it had suffered; and then he laid before
them two swords.
‘I do not wish for any sword,’ said Frodo.

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

955

‘Tonight at least you should wear one,’ said Gandalf.
Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and
had been laid at his side in Cirith Ungol. ‘Sting I gave to you Sam,’
he said.
‘No, master! Mr. Bilbo gave it to you, and it goes with his silver
coat; he would not wish anyone else to wear it now.’
Frodo gave way; and Gandalf, as if he were their esquire, knelt
and girt the sword-belts about them, and then rising he set circlets
of silver upon their heads. And when they were arrayed they went
to the great feast; and they sat at the King’s table with Gandalf,
´
and King Eomer
of Rohan, and the Prince Imrahil and all the chief
captains; and there also were Gimli and Legolas.
But when, after the Standing Silence, wine was brought there came
in two esquires to serve the kings; or so they seemed to be: one was
clad in the silver and sable of the Guards of Minas Tirith, and the
other in white and green. But Sam wondered what such young boys
were doing in an army of mighty men. Then suddenly as they drew
near and he could see them plainly, he exclaimed:
‘Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn’t Pippin. Mr.
Peregrin Took I should say, and Mr. Merry! How they have grown!
Bless me! But I can see there’s more tales to tell than ours.’
‘There are indeed,’ said Pippin turning towards him. ‘And we’ll
begin telling them, as soon as this feast is ended. In the meantime
you can try Gandalf. He’s not so close as he used to be, though he
laughs now more than he talks. For the present Merry and I are busy.
We are knights of the City and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.’
At last the glad day ended; and when the Sun was gone and the
round Moon rode slowly above the mists of Anduin and ﬂickered
through the ﬂuttering leaves, Frodo and Sam sat under the whispering
trees amid the fragrance of fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into
the night with Merry and Pippin and Gandalf, and after a while
Legolas and Gimli joined them. There Frodo and Sam learned much
of all that had happened to the Company after their fellowship was
broken on the evil day at Parth Galen by Rauros Falls; and still there
was always more to ask and more to tell.
Orcs, and talking trees, and leagues of grass, and galloping riders,
and glittering caves, and white towers and golden halls, and battles,
and tall ships sailing, all these passed before Sam’s mind until he felt
bewildered. But amidst all these wonders he returned always to his
astonishment at the size of Merry and Pippin; and he made them
stand back to back with Frodo and himself. He scratched his head.
‘Can’t understand it at your age!’ he said. ‘But there it is: you’re
three inches taller than you ought to be, or I’m a dwarf.’

956

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘That you certainly are not,’ said Gimli. ‘But what did I say?
Mortals cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come
of them than of a pot of beer.’
‘Ent-draughts?’ said Sam. ‘There you go about Ents again; but
what they are beats me. Why, it will take weeks before we get all
these things sized up!’
‘Weeks indeed,’ said Pippin. ‘And then Frodo will have to be
locked up in a tower in Minas Tirith and write it all down. Otherwise
he will forget half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.’
At length Gandalf rose. ‘The hands of the King are hands of
healing, dear friends,’ he said. ‘But you went to the very brink of
death ere he recalled you, putting forth all his power, and sent you
into the sweet forgetfulness of sleep. And though you have indeed
slept long and blessedly, still it is now time to sleep again.’
‘And not only Sam and Frodo here,’ said Gimli, ‘but you too,
Pippin. I love you, if only because of the pains you have cost me,
which I shall never forget. Nor shall I forget ﬁnding you on the hill
of the last battle. But for Gimli the Dwarf you would have been lost
then. But at least I know now the look of a hobbit’s foot, though it
be all that can be seen under a heap of bodies. And when I heaved
that great carcase off you, I made sure you were dead. I could have
torn out my beard. And it is only a day yet since you were ﬁrst up
and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.’
‘And I,’ said Legolas, ‘shall walk in the woods of this fair land,
which is rest enough. In days to come, if my Elven-lord allows, some
of our folk shall remove hither; and when we come it shall be blessed,
for a while. For a while: a month, a life, a hundred years of Men.
But Anduin is near, and Anduin leads down to the Sea. To the Sea!
To the Sea, to the Sea! The white gulls are crying,
The wind is blowing, and the white foam is ﬂying.
West, west away, the round sun is falling.
Grey ship, grey ship, do you hear them calling,
The voices of my people that have gone before me?
I will leave, I will leave the woods that bore me;
For our days are ending and our years failing.
I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing.
Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling,
Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling,
In Eressëa, in Elvenhome that no man can discover,
Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever!’

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

957

And so singing Legolas went away down the hill.
Then the others also departed, and Frodo and Sam went to their
beds and slept. And in the morning they rose again in hope and
peace; and they spent many days in Ithilien. For the Field of
Cormallen, where the host was now encamped, was near to Henneth
Annûn, and the stream that ﬂowed from its falls could be heard in
the night as it rushed down through its rocky gate, and passed through
the ﬂowery meads into the tides of Anduin by the Isle of Cair Andros.
The hobbits wandered here and there visiting again the places that
they had passed before; and Sam hoped always in some shadow of
the woods or secret glade to catch, maybe, a glimpse of the great
Oliphaunt. And when he learned that at the siege of Gondor there
had been a great number of these beasts but that they were all
destroyed, he thought it a sad loss.
‘Well, one can’t be everywhere at once, I suppose,’ he said. ‘But
I missed a lot, seemingly.’
In the meanwhile the host made ready for the return to Minas
Tirith. The weary rested and the hurt were healed. For some had
laboured and fought much with the remnants of the Easterlings and
Southrons, until all were subdued. And, latest of all, those returned
who had passed into Mordor and destroyed the fortresses in the north
of the land.
But at the last when the month of May was drawing near the
Captains of the West set out again; and they went aboard ship with
all their men, and they sailed from Cair Andros down Anduin to
Osgiliath; and there they remained for one day; and the day after
they came to the green ﬁelds of the Pelennor and saw again the white
towers under tall Mindolluin, the City of the Men of Gondor, last
memory of Westernesse, that had passed through the darkness and
ﬁre to a new day.
And there in the midst of the ﬁelds they set up their pavilions and
awaited the morning; for it was the Eve of May, and the King would
enter his gates with the rising of the Sun.

970

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

went the sons of Elrond. All the road was lined with people to do
them honour and praise them, from the Gate of the City to the walls
of the Pelennor. Then all others that dwelt afar went back to their
homes rejoicing; but in the City there was labour of many willing
hands to rebuild and renew and to remove all the scars of war and
the memory of the darkness.
The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and
Gimli; for Aragorn was loth for the fellowship to be dissolved. ‘At
last all such things must end,’ he said, ‘but I would have you wait a
little while longer: for the end of the deeds that you have shared in
has not yet come. A day draws near that I have looked for in all the
years of my manhood, and when it comes I would have my friends
beside me.’ But of that day he would say no more.
In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair
house with Gandalf, and they went to and fro as they wished. And
Frodo said to Gandalf: ‘Do you know what this day is that Aragorn
speaks of ? For we are happy here, and I don’t wish to go; but the
days are running away, and Bilbo is waiting; and the Shire is my
home.’
‘As for Bilbo,’ said Gandalf, ‘he is waiting for the same day, and
he knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is
now only May and high summer is not yet in; and though all things
may seem changed, as if an age of the world had gone by, yet to the
trees and the grass it is less than a year since you set out.’
‘Pippin,’ said Frodo, ‘didn’t you say that Gandalf was less close
than of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is
recovering.’
And Gandalf said: ‘Many folk like to know beforehand what is to
be set on the table; but those who have laboured to prepare the feast
like to keep their secret; for wonder makes the words of praise louder.
And Aragorn himself waits for a sign.’
There came a day when Gandalf could not be found, and the
Companions wondered what was going forward. But Gandalf took
Aragorn out from the City by night, and he brought him to the
southern feet of Mount Mindolluin; and there they found a path
made in ages past that few now dared to tread. For it led up on to
the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had been wont
to go. And they went up by steep ways, until they came to a high
ﬁeld below the snows that clad the lofty peaks, and it looked down
over the precipice that stood behind the City. And standing there
they surveyed the lands, for the morning was come; and they saw
the towers of the City far below them like white pencils touched by
the sunlight, and all the Vale of Anduin was like a garden, and the

976

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gondor; and Legolas and Gimli as ever rode together upon Arod.
In that riding went also Queen Arwen, and Celeborn and Galadriel
with their folk, and Elrond and his sons; and the princes of Dol
Amroth and of Ithilien, and many captains and knights. Never had
any king of the Mark such company upon the road as went with
Théoden Thengel’s son to the land of his home.
Without haste and at peace they passed into Anórien, and they
came to the Grey Wood under Amon Dı̂n; and there they heard a
sound as of drums beating in the hills, though no living thing could
be seen. Then Aragorn let the trumpets be blown; and heralds cried:
‘Behold, the King Elessar is come! The Forest of Drúadan he gives
to Ghân-buri-Ghân and to his folk, to be their own for ever; and
hereafter let no man enter it without their leave!’
Then the drums rolled loudly, and were silent.
At length after ﬁfteen days of journey the wain of King Théoden
passed through the green ﬁelds of Rohan and came to Edoras; and
there they all rested. The Golden Hall was arrayed with fair hangings
and it was ﬁlled with light, and there was held the highest feast that
it had known since the days of its building. For after three days the
Men of the Mark prepared the funeral of Théoden; and he was laid
in a house of stone with his arms and many other fair things that he
had possessed, and over him was raised a great mound, covered with
green turves of grass and of white evermind. And now there were
eight mounds on the east-side of the Barrowﬁeld.
Then the Riders of the King’s House upon white horses rode round
about the barrow and sang together a song of Théoden Thengel’s son
that Gléowine his minstrel made, and he made no other song after.
The slow voices of the Riders stirred the hearts even of those who
did not know the speech of that people; but the words of the song
brought a light to the eyes of the folk of the Mark as they heard again
afar the thunder of the hooves of the North and the voice of Eorl
crying above the battle upon the Field of Celebrant; and the tale of
the kings rolled on, and the horn of Helm was loud in the mountains,
until the Darkness came and King Théoden arose and rode through
the Shadow to the ﬁre, and died in splendour, even as the Sun,
returning beyond hope, gleamed upon Mindolluin in the morning.
Out of doubt, out of dark, to the day’s rising
he rode singing in the sun, sword unsheathing.
Hope he rekindled, and in hope ended;
over death, over dread, over doom lifted
out of loss, out of life, unto long glory.

978

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

When the feast was over, those who were to go took leave of King
´
Eomer.
Aragorn and his knights, and the people of Lórien and of
Rivendell, made ready to ride; but Faramir and Imrahil remained at
Edoras; and Arwen Evenstar remained also, and she said farewell to
her brethren. None saw her last meeting with Elrond her father,
for they went up into the hills and there spoke long together, and
bitter was their parting that should endure beyond the ends of the
world.
´
´
At the last before the guests set out Eomer
and Eowyn
came to
Merry, and they said: ‘Farewell now, Meriadoc of the Shire and
Holdwine of the Mark! Ride to good fortune, and ride back soon to
our welcome!’
´
And Eomer
said: ‘Kings of old would have laden you with gifts
that a wain could not bear for your deeds upon the ﬁelds of Mundburg; and yet you will take naught, you say, but the arms that were
given to you. This I suffer, for indeed I have no gift that is worthy;
but my sister begs you to receive this small thing, as a memorial of
Dernhelm and of the horns of the Mark at the coming of the morning.’
´
Then Eowyn
gave to Merry an ancient horn, small but cunningly
wrought all of fair silver with a baldric of green; and wrights had
engraven upon it swift horsemen riding in a line that wound about
it from the tip to the mouth; and there were set runes of great virtue.
´
‘This is an heirloom of our house,’ said Eowyn.
‘It was made by
the Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the Worm. Eorl
the Young brought it from the North. He that blows it at need shall
set fear in the hearts of his enemies and joy in the hearts of his friends,
and they shall hear him and come to him.’
Then Merry took the horn, for it could not be refused, and he
´
kissed Eowyn’s
hand; and they embraced him, and so they parted
for that time.
Now the guests were ready, and they drank the stirrup-cup, and
with great praise and friendship they departed, and came at length
to Helm’s Deep, and there they rested two days. Then Legolas repaid
his promise to Gimli and went with him to the Glittering Caves; and
when they returned he was silent, and would say only that Gimli
alone could ﬁnd ﬁt words to speak of them. ‘And never before has
a Dwarf claimed a victory over an Elf in a contest of words,’ said he.
‘Now therefore let us go to Fangorn and set the score right!’
From Deeping-coomb they rode to Isengard, and saw how the
Ents had busied themselves. All the stone-circle had been thrown
down and removed, and the land within was made into a garden
ﬁlled with orchards and trees, and a stream ran through it; but in
the midst of all there was a lake of clear water, and out of it the

MANY PARTINGS

981

Treebeard’s face became sad. ‘Forests may grow,’ he said. ‘Woods
may spread. But not Ents. There are no Entings.’
‘Yet maybe there is now more hope in your search,’ said Aragorn.
‘Lands will lie open to you eastward that have long been closed.’
But Treebeard shook his head and said: ‘It is far to go. And there
are too many Men there in these days. But I am forgetting my
manners! Will you stay here and rest a while? And maybe there are
some that would be pleased to pass through Fangorn Forest and so
shorten their road home?’ He looked at Celeborn and Galadriel.
But all save Legolas said that they must now take their leave and
depart either south or west. ‘Come, Gimli!’ said Legolas. ‘Now by
Fangorn’s leave I will visit the deep places of the Entwood and see
such trees as are nowhere else to be found in Middle-earth. You shall
come with me and keep your word; and thus we will journey on
together to our own lands in Mirkwood and beyond.’ To this Gimli
agreed, though with no great delight, it seemed.
‘Here then at last comes the ending of the Fellowship of the Ring,’
said Aragorn. ‘Yet I hope that ere long you will return to my land
with the help that you promised.’
‘We will come, if our own lords allow it,’ said Gimli. ‘Well, farewell, my hobbits! You should come safe to your own homes now,
and I shall not be kept awake for fear of your peril. We will send
word when we may, and some of us may yet meet at times; but I
fear that we shall not all be gathered together ever again.’
Then Treebeard said farewell to each of them in turn, and he bowed
three times slowly and with great reverence to Celeborn and Galadriel. ‘It is long, long since we met by stock or by stone, A vanimar,
vanimálion nostari!’ he said. ‘It is sad that we should meet only thus at
the ending. For the world is changing: I feel it in the water, I feel it in
the earth, and I smell it in the air. I do not think we shall meet again.’
And Celeborn said: ‘I do not know, Eldest.’ But Galadriel said:
‘Not in Middle-earth, nor until the lands that lie under the wave are
lifted up again. Then in the willow-meads of Tasarinan we may meet
in the Spring. Farewell!’
Last of all Merry and Pippin said good-bye to the old Ent, and
he grew gayer as he looked at them. ‘Well, my merry folk,’ he said,
‘will you drink another draught with me before you go?’
‘Indeed we will,’ they said, and he took them aside into the shade
of one of the trees, and there they saw that a great stone jar had been
set. And Treebeard ﬁlled three bowls, and they drank; and they saw
his strange eyes looking at them over the rim of his bowl. ‘Take care,
take care!’ he said. ‘For you have already grown since I saw you last.’
And they laughed and drained their bowls.

1080

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

has fallen, ﬁghting in Dale again, even while we fought here. I should call
that a heavy loss, if it was not a wonder rather that in his great age he could
still wield his axe as mightily as they say that he did, standing over the body
of King Brand before the Gate of Erebor until the darkness fell.
‘Yet things might have gone far otherwise and far worse. When you think
of the great Battle of the Pelennor, do not forget the battles in Dale and the
valour of Durin’s Folk. Think of what might have been. Dragon-ﬁre and
savage swords in Eriador, night in Rivendell. There might be no Queen in
Gondor. We might now hope to return from the victory here only to ruin
and ash. But that has been averted – because I met Thorin Oakenshield
one evening on the edge of spring in Bree. A chance-meeting, as we say in
Middle-earth.’
Dı́s was the daughter of Thráin II. She is the only dwarf-woman named in
these histories. It was said by Gimli that there are few dwarf-women, probably
no more than a third of the whole people. They seldom walk abroad except
at great need. They are in voice and appearance, and in garb if they must
go on a journey, so like to the dwarf-men that the eyes and ears of other
peoples cannot tell them apart. This has given rise to the foolish opinion
among Men that there are no dwarf-women, and that the Dwarves ‘grow
out of stone’.
It is because of the fewness of women among them that the kind of the
Dwarves increases slowly, and is in peril when they have no secure dwellings.
For Dwarves take only one wife or husband each in their lives, and are
jealous, as in all matters of their rights. The number of dwarf-men that marry
is actually less than one-third. For not all the women take husbands: some
desire none; some desire one that they cannot get, and so will have no other.
As for the men, very many also do not desire marriage, being engrossed in
their crafts.
Gimli Glóin’s son is renowned, for he was one of the Nine Walkers that set
out with the Ring; and he remained in the company of King Elessar throughout the War. He was named Elf-friend because of the great love that grew
between him and Legolas, son of King Thranduil, and because of his reverence for the Lady Galadriel.
After the fall of Sauron, Gimli brought south a part of the Dwarf-folk of
Erebor, and he became Lord of the Glittering Caves. He and his people did
great works in Gondor and Rohan. For Minas Tirith they forged gates of
mithril and steel to replace those broken by the Witch-king. Legolas his friend
also brought south Elves out of Greenwood, and they dwelt in Ithilien, and
it became once again the fairest country in all the westlands.
But when King Elessar gave up his life Legolas followed at last the desire of
his heart and sailed over Sea.

APPENDIX A

1081

Here follows one of the last notes in the Red Book
We have heard tell that Legolas took Gimli Glóin’s son with him because
of their great friendship, greater than any that has been between Elf and
Dwarf. If this is true, then it is strange indeed: that a Dwarf should be willing
to leave Middle-earth for any love, or that the Eldar should receive him, or
that the Lords of the West should permit it. But it is said that Gimli went
also out of desire to see again the beauty of Galadriel; and it may be that
she, being mighty among the Eldar, obtained this grace for him. More cannot
be said of this matter.

1098

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the Thain, and soon after they handed over their goods and ofﬁces
to their sons and rode away over the Sarn Ford, and they were not
seen again in the Shire. It was heard after that Master Meriadoc came
´
to Edoras and was with King Eomer
before he died in that autumn.
Then he and Thain Peregrin went to Gondor and passed what short
years were left to them in that realm, until they died and were laid
in Rath Dı́nen among the great of Gondor.
1541 In this year1 on March 1st came at last the Passing of King Elessar.
It is said that the beds of Meriadoc and Peregrin were set beside the
bed of the great king. Then Legolas built a grey ship in Ithilien, and
sailed down Anduin and so over Sea; and with him, it is said, went
Gimli the Dwarf. And when that ship passed an end was come in
Middle-earth of the Fellowship of the Ring.

1

Fourth Age (Gondor) 120.

