PROLOGUE

13

went to fetch it from his island he found the treasure was gone: a
magic ring, which had been given to him long ago on his birthday.
Bilbo guessed that this was the very ring that he had found, and as
he had won the game, it was already his by right. But being in a tight
place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum show him the way
out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo set down
in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not
even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it still appeared in the
original Red Book, as it did in several of the copies and abstracts.
But many copies contain the true account (as an alternative), derived
no doubt from notes by Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned
the truth, though they seem to have been unwilling to delete anything
actually written by the old hobbit himself.
Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo’s ﬁrst story, as soon as he
heard it, and he continued to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he got the true tale out of Bilbo after much questioning, which
for a while strained their friendship; but the wizard seemed to think
the truth important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also
thought it important, and disturbing, to ﬁnd that the good hobbit
had not told the truth from the ﬁrst: quite contrary to his habit. The
idea of a ‘present’ was not mere hobbitlike invention, all the same.
It was suggested to Bilbo, as he confessed, by Gollum’s talk that he
overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call the ring his ‘birthday-present’,
many times. That also Gandalf thought strange and suspicious; but
he did not discover the truth in this point for many more years, as
will be seen in this book.
Of Bilbo’s later adventures little more need be said here. With the
help of the ring he escaped from the orc-guards at the gate and
rejoined his companions. He used the ring many times on his quest,
chieﬂy for the help of his friends; but he kept it secret from them as
long as he could. After his return to his home he never spoke of it
again to anyone, save Gandalf and Frodo; and no one else in the
Shire knew of its existence, or so he believed. Only to Frodo did he
show the account of his Journey that he was writing.
His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his ﬁreplace, and his coat of
marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon-hoard, he
lent to a museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But
he kept in a drawer at Bag End the old cloak and hood that he had
worn on his travels; and the ring, secured by a ﬁne chain, remained
in his pocket.
He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his
ﬁfty-second year (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable occurred in
the Shire until Mr. Baggins began the preparations for the celebration

14

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

of his hundred-and-eleventh birthday (S.R. 1401). At this point this
History begins.
NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS
At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits in the
great events that led to the inclusion of the Shire in the Reunited
Kingdom awakened among them a more widespread interest in their
own history; and many of their traditions, up to that time still mainly
oral, were collected and written down. The greater families were also
concerned with events in the Kingdom at large, and many of their
members studied its ancient histories and legends. By the end of the
ﬁrst century of the Fourth Age there were already to be found in
the Shire several libraries that contained many historical books and
records.
The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers, at
Great Smials, and at Brandy Hall. This account of the end of the
Third Age is drawn mainly from the Red Book of Westmarch. That
most important source for the history of the War of the Ring was so
called because it was long preserved at Undertowers, the home of
the Fairbairns, Wardens of the Westmarch.* It was in origin Bilbo’s
private diary, which he took with him to Rivendell. Frodo brought
it back to the Shire, together with many loose leaves of notes, and
during S.R. 1420–1 he nearly ﬁlled its pages with his account of the
War. But annexed to it and preserved with it, probably in a single
red case, were the three large volumes, bound in red leather, that
Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift. To these four volumes there was
added in Westmarch a ﬁfth containing commentaries, genealogies,
and various other matter concerning the hobbit members of the
Fellowship.
The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many copies
were made, especially of the ﬁrst volume, for the use of the descendants of the children of Master Samwise. The most important copy,
however, has a different history. It was kept at Great Smials, but it
was written in Gondor, probably at the request of the great-grandson
of Peregrin, and completed in S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172). Its southern
scribe appended this note: Findegil, King’s Writer, ﬁnished this work
in IV 172. It is an exact copy in all details of the Thain’s Book in
Minas Tirith. That book was a copy, made at the request of King
Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and was brought to him
by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64.
The Thain’s Book was thus the ﬁrst copy made of the Red Book
* See Appendix B: annals 1451, 1462, 1482; and note at end of Appendix C.

22

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

understood that something quite exceptional was being planned for
that autumn. Bilbo was going to be eleventy-one, 111, a rather curious
number, and a very respectable age for a hobbit (the Old Took himself
had only reached 130); and Frodo was going to be thirty-three, 33, an
important number: the date of his ‘coming of age’.
Tongues began to wag in Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of
the coming event travelled all over the Shire. The history and character of Mr. Bilbo Baggins became once again the chief topic of conversation; and the older folk suddenly found their reminiscences in
welcome demand.
No one had a more attentive audience than old Ham Gamgee,
commonly known as the Gaffer. He held forth at The Ivy Bush, a
small inn on the Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority,
for he had tended the garden at Bag End for forty years, and had
helped old Holman in the same job before that. Now that he was
himself growing old and stiff in the joints, the job was mainly carried
on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father and son were on
very friendly terms with Bilbo and Frodo. They lived on the Hill
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End.
‘A very nice well-spoken gentlehobbit is Mr. Bilbo, as I’ve always
said,’ the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very
polite to him, calling him ‘Master Hamfast’, and consulting him
constantly upon the growing of vegetables – in the matter of ‘roots’,
especially potatoes, the Gaffer was recognized as the leading authority
by all in the neighbourhood (including himself ).
‘But what about this Frodo that lives with him?’ asked Old Noakes
of Bywater. ‘Baggins is his name, but he’s more than half a Brandybuck, they say. It beats me why any Baggins of Hobbiton should go
looking for a wife away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.’
‘And no wonder they’re queer,’ put in Daddy Twofoot (the
Gaffer’s next-door neighbour), ‘if they live on the wrong side of the
Brandywine River, and right agin the Old Forest. That’s a dark bad
place, if half the tales be true.’
‘You’re right, Dad!’ said the Gaffer. ‘Not that the Brandybucks
of Buckland live in the Old Forest; but they’re a queer breed, seemingly. They fool about with boats on that big river – and that isn’t
natural. Small wonder that trouble came of it, I say. But be that as
it may, Mr. Frodo is as nice a young hobbit as you could wish to
meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, and in more than looks. After all
his father was a Baggins. A decent respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo
Baggins; there was never much to tell of him, till he was drownded.’
‘Drownded?’ said several voices. They had heard this and other
darker rumours before, of course; but hobbits have a passion for
family history, and they were ready to hear it again.

24

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

a pony and some mighty big bags and a couple of chests. I don’t
doubt they were mostly full of treasure he had picked up in foreign
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they say; but there wasn’t
enough to ﬁll tunnels. But my lad Sam will know more about that.
He’s in and out of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days, he
is, and he listens to all Mr. Bilbo’s tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him
his letters – meaning no harm, mark you, and I hope no harm will
come of it.
‘Elves and Dragons! I says to him. Cabbages and potatoes are better
for me and you. Don’t go getting mixed up in the business of your betters,
or you’ll land in trouble too big for you, I says to him. And I might say
it to others,’ he added with a look at the stranger and the miller.
But the Gaffer did not convince his audience. The legend of
Bilbo’s wealth was now too ﬁrmly ﬁxed in the minds of the younger
generation of hobbits.
‘Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at
ﬁrst,’ argued the miller, voicing common opinion. ‘He’s often away
from home. And look at the outlandish folk that visit him: dwarves
coming at night, and that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf, and all.
You can say what you like, Gaffer, but Bag End’s a queer place, and
its folk are queerer.’
‘And you can say what you like, about what you know no more
of than you do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,’ retorted the Gaffer, disliking the miller even more than usual. ‘If that’s being queer, then we
could do with a bit more queerness in these parts. There’s some not
far away that wouldn’t offer a pint of beer to a friend, if they lived
in a hole with golden walls. But they do things proper at Bag End.
Our Sam says that everyone’s going to be invited to the party, and
there’s going to be presents, mark you, presents for all – this very
month as is.’
That very month was September, and as ﬁne as you could ask. A
day or two later a rumour (probably started by the knowledgeable
Sam) was spread about that there were going to be ﬁreworks – ﬁreworks, what is more, such as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh
on a century, not indeed since the Old Took died.
Days passed and The Day drew nearer. An odd-looking waggon
laden with odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening
and toiled up the Hill to Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out
of lamplit doors to gape at it. It was driven by outlandish folk, singing
strange songs: dwarves with long beards and deep hoods. A few of
them remained at Bag End. At the end of the second week in September a cart came in through Bywater from the direction of Brandywine Bridge in broad daylight. An old man was driving it all alone.

44

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark past, like
a shadow in the background of their memories; but it was ominous
and disquieting. It seemed that the evil power in Mirkwood had been
driven out by the White Council only to reappear in greater strength
in the old strongholds of Mordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt,
it was said. From there the power was spreading far and wide, and
away far east and south there were wars and growing fear. Orcs were
multiplying again in the mountains. Trolls were abroad, no longer
dull-witted, but cunning and armed with dreadful weapons. And
there were murmured hints of creatures more terrible than all these,
but they had no name.
Little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary hobbits.
But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began to hear queer
tales; and those whose business took them to the borders saw strange
things. The conversation in The Green Dragon at Bywater, one evening
in the spring of Frodo’s ﬁftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits
still laughed at them.
Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the ﬁre, and opposite
him was Ted Sandyman, the miller’s son; and there were various
other rustic hobbits listening to their talk.
‘Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,’ said Sam.
‘Ah,’ said Ted, ‘you do, if you listen. But I can hear ﬁreside-tales
and children’s stories at home, if I want to.’
‘No doubt you can,’ retorted Sam, ‘and I daresay there’s more
truth in some of them than you reckon. Who invented the stories
anyway? Take dragons now.’
‘No thank ’ee,’ said Ted, ‘I won’t. I heard tell of them when I was a
youngster, but there’s no call to believe in them now. There’s only one
Dragon in Bywater, and that’s Green,’ he said, getting a general laugh.
‘All right,’ said Sam, laughing with the rest. ‘But what about these
Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? They do say that
one bigger than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors
not long back.’
‘Who’s they?’
‘My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Bofﬁn at Overhill and
goes up to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He saw one.’
‘Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal’s always saying he’s seen things;
and maybe he sees things that ain’t there.’
‘But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking – walking
seven yards to a stride, if it was an inch.’
‘Then I bet it wasn’t an inch. What he saw was an elm tree, as
like as not.’

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

45

‘But this one was walking, I tell you; and there ain’t no elm tree
on the North Moors.’
‘Then Hal can’t have seen one,’ said Ted. There was some laughing and clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored
a point.
‘All the same,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t deny that others besides our
Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire – crossing it, mind
you: there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders
have never been so busy before.
‘And I’ve heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do say they
are going to the harbours, out away beyond the White Towers.’ Sam
waved his arm vaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it
was to the Sea, past the old towers beyond the western borders of
the Shire. But it was an old tradition that away over there stood the
Grey Havens, from which at times elven-ships set sail, never to return.
‘They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are going into
the West and leaving us,’ said Sam, half chanting the words, shaking
his head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed.
‘Well, that isn’t anything new, if you believe the old tales. And I
don’t see what it matters to me or you. Let them sail! But I warrant
you haven’t seen them doing it; nor anyone else in the Shire.’
‘Well, I don’t know,’ said Sam thoughtfully. He believed he had
once seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see more one day.
Of all the legends that he had heard in his early years such fragments
of tales and half-remembered stories about the Elves as the hobbits
knew, had always moved him most deeply. ‘There are some, even in
these parts, as know the Fair Folk and get news of them,’ he said.
‘There’s Mr. Baggins now, that I work for. He told me that they
were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves. And old Mr. Bilbo knew
more: many’s the talk I had with him when I was a little lad.’
‘Oh, they’re both cracked,’ said Ted. ‘Leastways old Bilbo was
cracked, and Frodo’s cracking. If that’s where you get your news
from, you’ll never want for moonshine. Well, friends, I’m off home.
Your good health!’ He drained his mug and went out noisily.
Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think
about. For one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden,
and he would have a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The
grass was growing fast. But Sam had more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up and went out.
It was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy rain.
The sun was down, and a cool pale evening was quietly fading into
night. He walked home under the early stars through Hobbiton and
up the Hill, whistling softly and thoughtfully.
*
*
*

46

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away. Then he
paid Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he went
off again. During the next year or two he had turned up fairly often,
coming unexpectedly after dusk, and going off without warning
before sunrise. He would not discuss his own business and journeys,
and seemed chieﬂy interested in small news about Frodo’s health
and doings.
Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since
Frodo had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the
wizard would never return and had given up all interest in hobbits.
But that evening, as Sam was walking home and twilight was fading,
there came the once familiar tap on the study window.
Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight.
They looked hard at one another.
‘All well eh?’ said Gandalf. ‘You look the same as ever, Frodo!’
‘So do you,’ Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf
looked older and more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself
and of the wide world, and soon they were deep in talk, and they
stayed up far into the night.
Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with
Frodo by the open window of the study. A bright ﬁre was on the
hearth, but the sun was warm, and the wind was in the South. Everything looked fresh, and the new green of spring was shimmering in
the ﬁelds and on the tips of the trees’ ﬁngers.
Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years before, when
Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a handkerchief. His hair was
perhaps whiter than it had been then, and his beard and eyebrows
were perhaps longer, and his face more lined with care and wisdom;
but his eyes were as bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smokerings with the same vigour and delight.
He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still, deep
in thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of
the tidings that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence.
‘Last night you began to tell me strange things about my ring,
Gandalf,’ he said. ‘And then you stopped, because you said that such
matters were best left until daylight. Don’t you think you had better
ﬁnish now? You say the ring is dangerous, far more dangerous than
I guess. In what way?’
‘In many ways,’ answered the wizard. ‘It is far more powerful than
I ever dared to think at ﬁrst, so powerful that in the end it would
utterly overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would
possess him.

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

47

‘In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic rings as
you call them, and they were, of course, of various kinds: some more
potent and some less. The lesser rings were only essays in the craft
before it was full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but triﬂes
– yet still to my mind dangerous for mortals. But the Great Rings,
the Rings of Power, they were perilous.
‘A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does not
die, but he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues,
until at last every minute is a weariness. And if he often uses the
Ring to make himself invisible, he fades: he becomes in the end
invisible permanently, and walks in the twilight under the eye of the
Dark Power that rules the Rings. Yes, sooner or later – later, if he is
strong or well-meaning to begin with, but neither strength nor good
purpose will last – sooner or later the Dark Power will devour him.’
‘How terrifying!’ said Frodo. There was another long silence. The
sound of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden.
‘How long have you known this?’ asked Frodo at length. ‘And
how much did Bilbo know?’
‘Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,’ said Gandalf.
‘He would certainly never have passed on to you anything that he
thought would be a danger, even though I promised to look after
you. He thought the ring was very beautiful, and very useful at need;
and if anything was wrong or queer, it was himself. He said that it
was ‘‘growing on his mind’’, and he was always worrying about it;
but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to blame. Though he
had found out that the thing needed looking after; it did not seem
always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded in an odd
way, and might suddenly slip off a ﬁnger where it had been tight.’
‘Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,’ said Frodo, ‘so I
have always kept it on its chain.’
‘Very wise,’ said Gandalf. ‘But as for his long life, Bilbo never connected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit for that to himself,
and he was very proud of it. Though he was getting restless and uneasy.
Thin and stretched he said. A sign that the ring was getting control.’
‘How long have you known all this?’ asked Frodo again.
‘Known?’ said Gandalf. ‘I have known much that only the Wise
know, Frodo. But if you mean ‘‘known about this ring’’, well, I still
do not know, one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no
longer doubt my guess.
‘When did I ﬁrst begin to guess?’ he mused, searching back in
memory. ‘Let me see – it was in the year that the White Council
drove the Dark Power from Mirkwood, just before the Battle of Five
Armies, that Bilbo found his ring. A shadow fell on my heart then,

50

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

No apparent change came over the ring. After a while Gandalf got
up, closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains.
The room became dark and silent, though the clack of Sam’s shears,
now nearer to the windows, could still be heard faintly from the
garden. For a moment the wizard stood looking at the ﬁre; then he
stooped and removed the ring to the hearth with the tongs, and at
once picked it up. Frodo gasped.
‘It is quite cool,’ said Gandalf. ‘Take it!’ Frodo received it on his
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than
ever.
‘Hold it up!’ said Gandalf. ‘And look closely!’
As Frodo did so, he now saw ﬁne lines, ﬁner than the ﬁnest penstrokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of ﬁre that
seemed to form the letters of a ﬂowing script. They shone piercingly
bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth.

‘I cannot read the ﬁery letters,’ said Frodo in a quavering voice.
‘No,’ said Gandalf, ‘but I can. The letters are Elvish, of an ancient
mode, but the language is that of Mordor, which I will not utter here.
But this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough:
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them.
It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore:
Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,
Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,
Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.
One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to ﬁnd them,
One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them
In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.’
He paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: ‘This is the
Master-ring, the One Ring to rule them all. This is the One Ring

58

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

had made no secret of our return journey to his home in the West.
Gollum’s sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.’
‘Then why didn’t he track Bilbo further?’ asked Frodo. ‘Why didn’t
he come to the Shire?’
‘Ah,’ said Gandalf, ‘now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to.
He set out and came back westward, as far as the Great River. But
then he turned aside. He was not daunted by the distance, I am sure.
No, something else drew him away. So my friends think, those that
hunted him for me.
‘The Wood-elves tracked him ﬁrst, an easy task for them, for his
trail was still fresh then. Through Mirkwood and back again it led
them, though they never caught him. The wood was full of the
rumour of him, dreadful tales even among beasts and birds. The
Woodmen said that there was some new terror abroad, a ghost that
drank blood. It climbed trees to ﬁnd nests; it crept into holes to ﬁnd
the young; it slipped through windows to ﬁnd cradles.
‘But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It
wandered off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves’ ken,
and was lost. And then I made a great mistake. Yes, Frodo, and not
the ﬁrst; though I fear it may prove the worst. I let the matter be. I
let him go; for I had much else to think of at that time, and I still
trusted the lore of Saruman.
‘Well, that was years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark
and dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again,
after Bilbo left here. And my search would have been in vain, but
for the help that I had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller
and huntsman of this age of the world. Together we sought for
Gollum down the whole length of Wilderland, without hope, and
without success. But at last, when I had given up the chase and
turned to other paths, Gollum was found. My friend returned out of
great perils bringing the miserable creature with him.
‘What he had been doing he would not say. He only wept and
called us cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed
him he whined and cringed, and rubbed his long hands, licking his
ﬁngers as if they pained him, as if he remembered some old torture.
But I am afraid there is no possible doubt: he had made his slow,
sneaking way, step by step, mile by mile, south, down at last to the
Land of Mordor.’
A heavy silence fell in the room. Frodo could hear his heart beating.
Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam’s shears could
now be heard.
‘Yes, to Mordor,’ said Gandalf. ‘Alas! Mordor draws all wicked
things, and the Dark Power was bending all its will to gather them

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

61

heavy sledge-hammer, it would make no dint in it. It cannot be
unmade by your hands, or by mine.
‘Your small ﬁre, of course, would not melt even ordinary gold. This
Ring has already passed through it unscathed, and even unheated. But
there is no smith’s forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not
even the anvils and furnaces of the Dwarves could do that. It has
been said that dragon-ﬁre could melt and consume the Rings of
Power, but there is not now any dragon left on earth in which the
old ﬁre is hot enough; nor was there ever any dragon, not even
Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the One Ring, the
Ruling Ring, for that was made by Sauron himself.
‘There is only one way: to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom in the depths
of Orodruin, the Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you
really wish to destroy it, to put it beyond the grasp of the Enemy for
ever.’
‘I do really wish to destroy it!’ cried Frodo. ‘Or, well, to have it
destroyed. I am not made for perilous quests. I wish I had never seen
the Ring! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?’
‘Such questions cannot be answered,’ said Gandalf. ‘You may be
sure that it was not for any merit that others do not possess: not for
power or wisdom, at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you
must therefore use such strength and heart and wits as you have.’
‘But I have so little of any of these things! You are wise and
powerful. Will you not take the Ring?’
‘No!’ cried Gandalf, springing to his feet. ‘With that power I should
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring would gain
a power still greater and more deadly.’ His eyes ﬂashed and his face
was lit as by a ﬁre within. ‘Do not tempt me! For I do not wish to
become like the Dark Lord himself. Yet the way of the Ring to my
heart is by pity, pity for weakness and the desire of strength to do
good. Do not tempt me! I dare not take it, not even to keep it safe,
unused. The wish to wield it would be too great for my strength. I
shall have such need of it. Great perils lie before me.’
He went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shutters. Sunlight streamed back again into the room. Sam passed along
the path outside whistling. ‘And now,’ said the wizard, turning back
to Frodo, ‘the decision lies with you. But I will always help you.’ He
laid his hand on Frodo’s shoulder. ‘I will help you bear this burden,
as long as it is yours to bear. But we must do something, soon. The
Enemy is moving.’
There was a long silence. Gandalf sat down again and puffed at
his pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes seemed closed, but under the
lids he was watching Frodo intently. Frodo gazed ﬁxedly at the red

62

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

embers on the hearth, until they ﬁlled all his vision, and he seemed
to be looking down into profound wells of ﬁre. He was thinking of
the fabled Cracks of Doom and the terror of the Fiery Mountain.
‘Well!’ said Gandalf at last. ‘What are you thinking about? Have
you decided what to do?’
‘No!’ answered Frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness,
and ﬁnding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the
window he could see the sunlit garden. ‘Or perhaps, yes. As far as I
understand what you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and
guard it, at least for the present, whatever it may do to me.’
‘Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it
with that purpose,’ said Gandalf.
‘I hope so,’ said Frodo. ‘But I hope that you may ﬁnd some other
better keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it seems that I am a danger,
a danger to all that live near me. I cannot keep the Ring and stay
here. I ought to leave Bag End, leave the Shire, leave everything and
go away.’ He sighed.
‘I should like to save the Shire, if I could – though there have been
times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words,
and have felt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragons might be
good for them. But I don’t feel like that now. I feel that as long as
the Shire lies behind, safe and comfortable, I shall ﬁnd wandering
more bearable: I shall know that somewhere there is a ﬁrm foothold,
even if my feet cannot stand there again.
‘Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo’s or
better, ending in peace. But this would mean exile, a ﬂight from
danger into danger, drawing it after me. And I suppose I must go
alone, if I am to do that and save the Shire. But I feel very small,
and very uprooted, and well – desperate. The Enemy is so strong
and terrible.’
He did not tell Gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to
follow Bilbo ﬂamed up in his heart – to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps
to ﬁnd him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could
almost have run out there and then down the road without his hat,
as Bilbo had done on a similar morning long ago.
‘My dear Frodo!’ exclaimed Gandalf. ‘Hobbits really are amazing
creatures, as I have said before. You can learn all that there is to
know about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years
they can still surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get such
an answer, not even from you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing
his heir, though he little thought how important it would prove. I
am afraid you are right. The Ring will not be able to stay hidden in
the Shire much longer; and for your own sake, as well as for others,

THE SHADOW OF THE PAST

63

you will have to go, and leave the name of Baggins behind you. That
name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or in the Wild. I will
give you a travelling name now. When you go, go as Mr. Underhill.
‘But I don’t think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone
you can trust, and who would be willing to go by your side – and
that you would be willing to take into unknown perils. But if you
look for a companion, be careful in choosing! And be careful of what
you say, even to your closest friends! The enemy has many spies and
many ways of hearing.’
Suddenly he stopped as if listening. Frodo became aware that all
was very quiet, inside and outside. Gandalf crept to one side of the
window. Then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long
arm out and downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam
Gamgee’s curly head hauled by one ear.
‘Well, well, bless my beard!’ said Gandalf. ‘Sam Gamgee is it?
Now what may you be doing?’
‘Lor bless you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Nothing! Leastways
I was just trimming the grass-border under the window, if you follow
me.’ He picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence.
‘I don’t,’ said Gandalf grimly. ‘It is some time since I last heard
the sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?’
‘Eavesdropping, sir? I don’t follow you, begging your pardon.
There ain’t no eaves at Bag End, and that’s a fact.’
‘Don’t be a fool! What have you heard, and why did you listen?’
Gandalf ’s eyes ﬂashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.
‘Mr. Frodo, sir!’ cried Sam quaking. ‘Don’t let him hurt me, sir!
Don’t let him turn me into anything unnatural! My old dad would
take on so. I meant no harm, on my honour, sir!’
‘He won’t hurt you,’ said Frodo, hardly able to keep from laughing,
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. ‘He knows, as
well as I do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer
his questions straight away!’
‘Well, sir,’ said Sam dithering a little. ‘I heard a deal that I didn’t
rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and Mr. Bilbo, sir,
and dragons, and a ﬁery mountain, and – and Elves, sir. I listened
because I couldn’t help myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless
me, sir, but I do love tales of that sort. And I believe them too,
whatever Ted may say. Elves, sir! I would dearly love to see them.
Couldn’t you take me to see Elves, sir, when you go?’
Suddenly Gandalf laughed. ‘Come inside!’ he shouted, and putting
out both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings
and all, right through the window and stood him on the ﬂoor. ‘Take
you to see Elves, eh?’ he said, eyeing Sam closely, but with a smile
ﬂickering on his face. ‘So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?’

64

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I did, sir. And that’s why I choked: which you heard seemingly.
I tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.’
‘It can’t be helped, Sam,’ said Frodo sadly. He had suddenly
realized that ﬂying from the Shire would mean more painful partings
than merely saying farewell to the familiar comforts of Bag End. ‘I
shall have to go. But’ – and here he looked hard at Sam – ‘if you
really care about me, you will keep that dead secret. See? If you don’t,
if you even breathe a word of what you’ve heard here, then I hope
Gandalf will turn you into a spotted toad and ﬁll the garden full of
grass-snakes.’
Sam fell on his knees, trembling. ‘Get up, Sam!’ said Gandalf. ‘I
have thought of something better than that. Something to shut your
mouth, and punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with
Mr. Frodo!’
‘Me, sir!’ cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk.
‘Me go and see Elves and all! Hooray!’ he shouted, and then burst
into tears.

Chapter 3
THREE IS COMPANY
‘You ought to go quietly, and you ought to go soon,’ said Gandalf.
Two or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made no sign of
getting ready to go.
‘I know. But it is difﬁcult to do both,’ he objected. ‘If I just vanish
like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.’
‘Of course you mustn’t vanish!’ said Gandalf. ‘That wouldn’t do
at all! I said soon, not instantly. If you can think of any way of slipping
out of the Shire without its being generally known, it will be worth
a little delay. But you must not delay too long.’
‘What about the autumn, on or after Our Birthday?’ asked Frodo.
‘I think I could probably make some arrangements by then.’
To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had
come to the point: Bag End seemed a more desirable residence than
it had for years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his
last summer in the Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at
least of his heart would think more kindly of journeying, as it always
did at that season. He had indeed privately made up his mind to
leave on his ﬁftieth birthday: Bilbo’s one hundred and twenty-eighth.
It seemed somehow the proper day on which to set out and follow
him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and the one thing
that made the thought of leaving bearable. He thought as little as
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in the end. But
he did not tell all his thoughts to Gandalf. What the wizard guessed
was always difﬁcult to tell.
He looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘Very well,’ he said. ‘I think that
will do – but it must not be any later. I am getting very anxious. In
the meanwhile, do take care, and don’t let out any hint of where you
are going! And see that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I
really shall turn him into a toad.’
‘As for where I am going,’ said Frodo, ‘it would be difﬁcult to give
that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.’
‘Don’t be absurd!’ said Gandalf. ‘I am not warning you against
leaving an address at the post-ofﬁce! But you are leaving the Shire –
and that should not be known, until you are far away. And you must
go, or at least set out, either North, South, West or East – and the
direction should certainly not be known.’
‘I have been so taken up with the thoughts of leaving Bag End, and
of saying farewell, that I have never even considered the direction,’

66

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

said Frodo. ‘For where am I to go? And by what shall I steer? What
is to be my quest? Bilbo went to ﬁnd a treasure, there and back again;
but I go to lose one, and not return, as far as I can see.’
‘But you cannot see very far,’ said Gandalf. ‘Neither can I. It may
be your task to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for
others: I do not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long
road yet.’
‘No indeed!’ said Frodo. ‘But in the meantime what course am I
to take?’
‘Towards danger; but not too rashly, nor too straight,’ answered
the wizard. ‘If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey
should not prove too perilous, though the Road is less easy than it
was, and it will grow worse as the year fails.’
‘Rivendell!’ said Frodo. ‘Very good: I will go east, and I will make
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.’
He spoke lightly; but his heart was moved suddenly with a desire to
see the house of Elrond Halfelven, and breathe the air of that deep
valley where many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace.
One summer’s evening an astonishing piece of news reached the
Ivy Bush and Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders
of the Shire were forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo
was selling Bag End, indeed he had already sold it – to the SackvilleBagginses!
‘For a nice bit, too,’ said some. ‘At a bargain price,’ said others,
‘and that’s more likely when Mistress Lobelia’s the buyer.’ (Otho
had died some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.)
Just why Mr. Frodo was selling his beautiful hole was even more
debatable than the price. A few held the theory – supported by the
nods and hints of Mr. Baggins himself – that Frodo’s money was
running out: he was going to leave Hobbiton and live in a quiet way
on the proceeds of the sale down in Buckland among his Brandybuck
relations. ‘As far from the Sackville-Bagginses as may be,’ some
added. But so ﬁrmly ﬁxed had the notion of the immeasurable wealth
of the Bagginses of Bag End become that most found this hard to
believe, harder than any other reason or unreason that their fancy
could suggest: to most it suggested a dark and yet unrevealed plot
by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go about
by day, it was well known that he was ‘hiding up in the Bag End’.
But however a removal might ﬁt in with the designs of his wizardry,
there was no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to
Buckland.
‘Yes, I shall be moving this autumn,’ he said. ‘Merry Brandybuck
is looking out for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.’

THREE IS COMPANY

67

As a matter of fact with Merry’s help he had already chosen
and bought a little house at Crickhollow in the country beyond
Bucklebury. To all but Sam he pretended he was going to settle down
there permanently. The decision to set out eastwards had suggested
the idea to him; for Buckland was on the eastern borders of the Shire,
and as he had lived there in childhood his going back would at least
seem credible.
Gandalf stayed in the Shire for over two months. Then one
evening, at the end of June, soon after Frodo’s plan had been ﬁnally
arranged, he suddenly announced that he was going off again next
morning. ‘Only for a short while, I hope,’ he said. ‘But I am going
down beyond the southern borders to get some news, if I can. I have
been idle longer than I should.’
He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather
worried. ‘Has anything happened?’ he asked.
‘Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious
and needs looking into. If I think it necessary after all for you to get
off at once, I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In
the meanwhile stick to your plan; but be more careful than ever,
especially of the Ring. Let me impress on you once more: don’t use
it! ’
He went off at dawn. ‘I may be back any day,’ he said. ‘At the
very latest I shall come back for the farewell party. I think after all
you may need my company on the Road.’
At ﬁrst Frodo was a good deal disturbed, and wondered often
what Gandalf could have heard; but his uneasiness wore off, and in
the ﬁne weather he forgot his troubles for a while. The Shire had
seldom seen so fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were
laden with apples, honey was dripping in the combs, and the corn
was tall and full.
Autumn was well under way before Frodo began to worry about
Gandalf again. September was passing and there was still no news
of him. The Birthday, and the removal, drew nearer, and still he did
not come, or send word. Bag End began to be busy. Some of Frodo’s
friends came to stay and help him with the packing: there was
Fredegar Bolger and Folco Bofﬁn, and of course his special friends
Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between them they turned the
whole place upside-down.
On September 20th two covered carts went off laden to Buckland,
conveying the furniture and goods that Frodo had not sold to his
new home, by way of the Brandywine Bridge.The next day Frodo
became really anxious, and kept a constant look-out for Gandalf.
Thursday, his birthday morning, dawned as fair and clear as it had

68

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

long ago for Bilbo’s great party. Still Gandalf did not appear. In the
evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was quite small, just a dinner
for himself and his four helpers; but he was troubled and felt in no
mood for it. The thought that he would so soon have to part with
his young friends weighed on his heart. He wondered how he would
break it to them.
The four younger hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the
party soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf ’s absence. The
dining-room was bare except for a table and chairs, but the food was
good, and there was good wine: Frodo’s wine had not been included
in the sale to the Sackville-Bagginses.
‘Whatever happens to the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s get
their claws on it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!’ said
Frodo, as he drained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards.
When they had sung many songs, and talked of many things
they had done together, they toasted Bilbo’s birthday, and they
drank his health and Frodo’s together according to Frodo’s custom.
Then they went out for a sniff of air, and glimpse of the stars, and
then they went to bed. Frodo’s party was over, and Gandalf had not
come.
The next morning they were busy packing another cart with the
remainder of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off
with Fatty (that is Fredegar Bolger). ‘Someone must get there and
warm the house before you arrive,’ said Merry. ‘Well, see you later
– the day after tomorrow, if you don’t go to sleep on the way!’
Folco went home after lunch, but Pippin remained behind. Frodo
was restless and anxious, listening in vain for a sound of Gandalf.
He decided to wait until nightfall. After that, if Gandalf wanted him
urgently, he would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there ﬁrst.
For Frodo was going on foot. His plan – for pleasure and a last look
at the Shire as much as any other reason – was to walk from Hobbiton
to Bucklebury Ferry, taking it fairly easy.
‘I shall get myself a bit into training, too,’ he said, looking at
himself in a dusty mirror in the half-empty hall. He had not done
any strenuous walking for a long time, and the reﬂection looked
rather ﬂabby, he thought.
After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired
son, Lotho, turned up, much to Frodo’s annoyance. ‘Ours at last!’
said Lobelia, as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true,
for the sale of Bag End did not take effect until midnight. But Lobelia
can perhaps be forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventyseven years longer for Bag End than she once hoped, and she was
now a hundred years old. Anyway, she had come to see that nothing

THREE IS COMPANY

69

she had paid for had been carried off; and she wanted the keys. It
took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought a complete inventory with her and went right through it. In the end she departed with
Lotho and the spare key and the promise that the other key would
be left at the Gamgees’ in Bagshot Row. She snorted, and showed
plainly that she thought the Gamgees capable of plundering the hole
during the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea.
He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee in the kitchen.
It had been ofﬁcially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland
‘to do for Mr. Frodo and look after his bit of garden’; an arrangement
that was approved by the Gaffer, though it did not console him for
the prospect of having Lobelia as a neighbour.
‘Our last meal at Bag End!’ said Frodo, pushing back his chair.
They left the washing up for Lobelia. Pippin and Sam strapped up
their three packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for
a last stroll in the garden. Sam disappeared.
The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled. Frodo wandered round the familiar rooms, and saw the light
of the sunset fade on the walls, and shadows creep out of the corners.
It grew slowly dark indoors. He went out and walked down to the
gate at the bottom of the path, and then on a short way down the
Hill Road. He half expected to see Gandalf come striding up through
the dusk.
The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. ‘It’s going
to be a ﬁne night,’ he said aloud. ‘That’s good for a beginning. I feel
like walking. I can’t bear any more hanging about. I am going to
start, and Gandalf must follow me.’ He turned to go back, and then
stopped, for he heard voices, just round the corner by the end of
Bagshot Row. One voice was certainly the old Gaffer’s; the other was
strange, and somehow unpleasant. He could not make out what it
said, but he heard the Gaffer’s answers, which were rather shrill. The
old man seemed put out.
‘No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam
went with him: anyway all his stuff went. Yes, sold out and gone, I
tell’ee. Why? Why’s none of my business, or yours. Where to? That
ain’t no secret. He’s moved to Bucklebury or some such place, away
down yonder. Yes it is – a tidy way. I’ve never been so far myself;
they’re queer folks in Buckland. No, I can’t give no message. Good
night to you!’
Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why
the fact that they did not come on up the Hill seemed a great relief.
‘I am sick of questions and curiosity about my doings, I suppose,’
he thought. ‘What an inquisitive lot they all are!’ He had half a mind

70

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

to go and ask the Gaffer who the inquirer was; but he thought better
(or worse) of it, and turned and walked quickly back to Bag End.
Pippin was sitting on his pack in the porch. Sam was not there.
Frodo stepped inside the dark door. ‘Sam!’ he called. ‘Sam! Time!’
‘Coming, sir!’ came the answer from far within, followed soon by
Sam himself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying farewell to the
beer-barrel in the cellar.
‘All aboard, Sam?’ said Frodo.
‘Yes, sir. I’ll last for a bit now, sir.’
Frodo shut and locked the round door, and gave the key to Sam.
‘Run down with this to your home, Sam!’ he said. ‘Then cut along
the Row and meet us as quick as you can at the gate in the lane
beyond the meadows. We are not going through the village tonight.
Too many ears pricking and eyes prying.’ Sam ran off at full speed.
‘Well, now we’re off at last!’ said Frodo. They shouldered their
packs and took up their sticks, and walked round the corner to the
west side of Bag End. ‘Good-bye!’ said Frodo, looking at the dark
blank windows. He waved his hand, and then turned and (following
Bilbo, if he had known it) hurried after Peregrin down the gardenpath. They jumped over the low place in the hedge at the bottom
and took to the ﬁelds, passing into the darkness like a rustle in the
grasses.
At the bottom of the Hill on its western side they came to the gate
opening on to a narrow lane. There they halted and adjusted the
straps of their packs. Presently Sam appeared, trotting quickly and
breathing hard; his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders,
and he had put on his head a tall shapeless felt bag, which he called
a hat. In the gloom he looked very much like a dwarf.
‘I am sure you have given me all the heaviest stuff,’ said Frodo.
‘I pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.’
‘I could take a lot more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,’ said
Sam stoutly and untruthfully.
‘No you don’t, Sam!’ said Pippin. ‘It is good for him. He’s got
nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He’s been slack lately,
and he’ll feel the weight less when he’s walked off some of his own.’
‘Be kind to a poor old hobbit!’ laughed Frodo. ‘I shall be as thin
as a willow-wand, I’m sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was
talking nonsense. I suspect you have taken more than your share,
Sam, and I shall look into it at our next packing.’ He picked up his
stick again. ‘Well, we all like walking in the dark,’ he said, ‘so let’s
put some miles behind us before bed.’
For a short way they followed the lane westwards. Then leaving
it they turned left and took quietly to the ﬁelds again. They went in

THREE IS COMPANY

71

single ﬁle along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night
fell dark about them. In their dark cloaks they were as invisible as if
they all had magic rings. Since they were all hobbits, and were trying
to be silent, they made no noise that even hobbits would hear. Even
the wild things in the ﬁelds and woods hardly noticed their passing.
After some time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a
narrow plank-bridge. The stream was there no more than a winding
black ribbon, bordered with leaning alder-trees. A mile or two further
south they hastily crossed the great road from the Brandywine Bridge;
they were now in the Tookland and bending south-eastwards they
made for the Green Hill Country. As they began to climb its ﬁrst
slopes they looked back and saw the lamps in Hobbiton far off twinkling in the gentle valley of the Water. Soon it disappeared in the folds
of the darkened land, and was followed by Bywater beside its grey
pool. When the light of the last farm was far behind, peeping among
the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell.
‘I wonder if I shall ever look down into that valley again,’ he said
quietly.
When they had walked for about three hours they rested. The
night was clear, cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps of mist were
creeping up the hill-sides from the streams and deep meadows. Thinclad birches, swaying in a light wind above their heads, made a black
net against the pale sky. They ate a very frugal supper (for hobbits),
and then went on again. Soon they struck a narrow road, that went
rolling up and down, fading grey into the darkness ahead: the road
to Woodhall, and Stock, and the Bucklebury Ferry. It climbed away
from the main road in the Water-valley, and wound over the skirts
of the Green Hills towards Woody End, a wild corner of the
Eastfarthing.
After a while they plunged into a deeply cloven track between tall
trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At
ﬁrst they talked, or hummed a tune softly together, being now far
away from inquisitive ears. Then they marched on in silence, and
Pippin began to lag behind. At last, as they began to climb a steep
slope, he stopped and yawned.
‘I am so sleepy,’ he said, ‘that soon I shall fall down on the road.
Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.’
‘I thought you liked walking in the dark,’ said Frodo. ‘But there
is no great hurry. Merry expects us some time the day after tomorrow;
but that leaves us nearly two days more. We’ll halt at the ﬁrst likely
spot.’
‘The wind’s in the West,’ said Sam. ‘If we get to the other side
of this hill, we shall ﬁnd a spot that is sheltered and snug enough,
sir. There is a dry ﬁr-wood just ahead, if I remember rightly.’ Sam

72

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

knew the land well within twenty miles of Hobbiton, but that was
the limit of his geography.
Just over the top of the hill they came on the patch of ﬁr-wood.
Leaving the road they went into the deep resin-scented darkness of
the trees, and gathered dead sticks and cones to make a ﬁre. Soon
they had a merry crackle of ﬂame at the foot of a large ﬁr-tree and
they sat round it for a while, until they began to nod. Then, each in
an angle of the great tree’s roots, they curled up in their cloaks and
blankets, and were soon fast asleep. They set no watch; even Frodo
feared no danger yet, for they were still in the heart of the Shire. A
few creatures came and looked at them when the ﬁre had died away.
A fox passing through the wood on business of his own stopped
several minutes and sniffed.
‘Hobbits!’ he thought. ‘Well, what next? I have heard of strange
doings in this land, but I have seldom heard of a hobbit sleeping out
of doors under a tree. Three of them! There’s something mighty
queer behind this.’ He was quite right, but he never found out any
more about it.
The morning came, pale and clammy. Frodo woke up ﬁrst, and
found that a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck
was stiff. ‘Walking for pleasure! Why didn’t I drive?’ he thought, as
he usually did at the beginning of an expedition. ‘And all my beautiful
feather beds are sold to the Sackville-Bagginses! These tree-roots
would do them good.’ He stretched. ‘Wake up, hobbits!’ he cried.
‘It’s a beautiful morning.’
‘What’s beautiful about it?’ said Pippin, peering over the edge of
his blanket with one eye. ‘Sam! Get breakfast ready for half-past nine!
Have you got the bath-water hot?’
Sam jumped up, looking rather bleary. ‘No, sir, I haven’t, sir!’ he
said.
Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and rolled him over, and
then walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was
rising red out of the mists that lay thick on the world. Touched with
gold and red the autumn trees seemed to be sailing rootless in a
shadowy sea. A little below him to the left the road ran down steeply
into a hollow and disappeared.
When he returned Sam and Pippin had got a good ﬁre going.
‘Water!’ shouted Pippin. ‘Where’s the water?’
‘I don’t keep water in my pockets,’ said Frodo.
‘We thought you had gone to ﬁnd some,’ said Pippin, busy setting
out the food, and cups. ‘You had better go now.’
‘You can come too,’ said Frodo, ‘and bring all the water-bottles.’
There was a stream at the foot of the hill. They ﬁlled their bottles

THREE IS COMPANY

73

and the small camping kettle at a little fall where the water fell a few
feet over an outcrop of grey stone. It was icy cold; and they spluttered
and puffed as they bathed their faces and hands.
When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed up again,
it was after ten o’clock, and the day was beginning to turn ﬁne and
hot. They went down the slope, and across the stream where it dived
under the road, and up the next slope, and up and down another
shoulder of the hills; and by that time their cloaks, blankets, water,
food, and other gear already seemed a heavy burden.
The day’s march promised to be warm and tiring work. After some
miles, however, the road ceased to roll up and down: it climbed to
the top of a steep bank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way, and then
prepared to go down for the last time. In front of them they saw the
lower lands dotted with small clumps of trees that melted away in
the distance to a brown woodland haze. They were looking across
the Woody End towards the Brandywine River. The road wound
away before them like a piece of string.
‘The road goes on for ever,’ said Pippin; ‘but I can’t without a
rest. It is high time for lunch.’ He sat down on the bank at the side
of the road and looked away east into the haze, beyond which lay
the River, and the end of the Shire in which he had spent all his life.
Sam stood by him. His round eyes were wide open – for he was
looking across lands he had never seen to a new horizon.
‘Do Elves live in those woods?’ he asked.
‘Not that I ever heard,’ said Pippin. Frodo was silent. He too was
gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it before.
Suddenly he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly:
The Road goes ever on and on
Down from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
And I must follow, if I can,
Pursuing it with weary feet,
Until it joins some larger way,
Where many paths and errands meet.
And whither then? I cannot say.
‘That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo’s rhyming,’ said Pippin. ‘Or
is it one of your imitations? It does not sound altogether encouraging.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It came to me then, as if I was making
it up; but I may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds me very
much of Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often
to say there was only one Road; that it was like a great river: its

74

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

springs were at every doorstep, and every path was its tributary. ‘‘It’s
a dangerous business, Frodo, going out of your door,’’ he used to
say. ‘‘You step into the Road, and if you don’t keep your feet, there
is no knowing where you might be swept off to. Do you realize that
this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood, and that if you let
it, it might take you to the Lonely Mountain or even further and to
worse places?’’ He used to say that on the path outside the front door
at Bag End, especially after he had been out for a long walk.’
‘Well, the Road won’t sweep me anywhere for an hour at least,’
said Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example,
putting their packs against the bank and their legs out into the road.
After a rest they had a good lunch, and then more rest.
The sun was beginning to get low and the light of afternoon was
on the land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a
soul on the road. This way was not much used, being hardly ﬁt for
carts, and there was little trafﬁc to the Woody End. They had been
jogging along again for an hour or more when Sam stopped a moment
as if listening. They were now on level ground, and the road after
much winding lay straight ahead through grass-land sprinkled with
tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.
‘I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,’ said
Sam.
They looked back, but the turn of the road prevented them from
seeing far. ‘I wonder if that is Gandalf coming after us,’ said Frodo;
but even as he said it, he had a feeling that it was not so, and a
sudden desire to hide from the view of the rider came over him.
‘It may not matter much,’ he said apologetically, ‘but I would
rather not be seen on the road – by anyone. I am sick of my doings
being noticed and discussed. And if it is Gandalf,’ he added as an
afterthought, ‘we can give him a little surprise, to pay him out for
being so late. Let’s get out of sight!’
The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow
not far from the road. There they lay ﬂat. Frodo hesitated for a
second: curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire
to hide. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself
down in a patch of long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the
road. Then he lifted his head and peered cautiously above one of the
great roots.
Round the corner came a black horse, no hobbit-pony but a fullsized horse; and on it sat a large man, who seemed to crouch in the
saddle, wrapped in a great black cloak and hood, so that only his
boots in the high stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and
invisible.

THREE IS COMPANY

75

When it reached the tree and was level with Frodo the horse stopped.
The riding ﬁgure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From
inside the hood came a noise as of someone snifﬁng to catch an elusive
scent; the head turned from side to side of the road.
A sudden unreasoning fear of discovery laid hold of Frodo, and
he thought of his Ring. He hardly dared to breathe, and yet the desire
to get it out of his pocket became so strong that he began slowly to
move his hand. He felt that he had only to slip it on, and then he
would be safe. The advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used
the Ring. ‘And I am still in the Shire,’ he thought, as his hand touched
the chain on which it hung. At that moment the rider sat up, and
shook the reins. The horse stepped forward, walking slowly at ﬁrst,
and then breaking into a quick trot.
Frodo crawled to the edge of the road and watched the rider, until
he dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it
seemed to him that suddenly, before it passed out of sight, the horse
turned aside and went into the trees on the right.
‘Well, I call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,’ said Frodo
to himself, as he walked towards his companions. Pippin and Sam
had remained ﬂat in the grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo
described the rider and his strange behaviour.
‘I can’t say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling for
me; and also I felt certain that I did not want him to discover me.
I’ve never seen or felt anything like it in the Shire before.’
‘But what has one of the Big People got to do with us?’ said Pippin.
‘And what is he doing in this part of the world?’
‘There are some Men about,’ said Frodo. ‘Down in the Southfarthing they have had trouble with Big People, I believe. But I have
never heard of anything like this rider. I wonder where he comes
from.’
‘Begging your pardon,’ put in Sam suddenly, ‘I know where he
comes from. It’s from Hobbiton that this here black rider comes,
unless there’s more than one. And I know where he’s going to.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment. ‘Why didn’t you speak up before?’
‘I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back
to our hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me:
Hallo, Sam! he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this
morning. There’s been a strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag
End, and he’s only just gone. I’ve sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I
liked the sound of him. He seemed mighty put out, when I told him Mr.
Baggins had left his old home for good. Hissed at me, he did. It gave me
quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was he? says I to the Gaffer. I
don’t know, says he; but he wasn’t a hobbit. He was tall and black-like,

76

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and he stooped over me. I reckon it was one of the Big Folk from foreign
parts. He spoke funny.
‘I couldn’t stay to hear more, sir, since you were waiting; and I
didn’t give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and
more than a bit blind, and it must have been near dark when this
fellow come up the Hill and found him taking the air at the end of
our Row. I hope he hasn’t done no harm, sir, nor me.’
‘The Gaffer can’t be blamed anyway,’ said Frodo. ‘As a matter of
fact I heard him talking to a stranger, who seemed to be inquiring
for me, and I nearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had,
or you had told me about it before. I might have been more careful
on the road.’
‘Still, there may be no connexion between this rider and the
Gaffer’s stranger,’ said Pippin. ‘We left Hobbiton secretly enough,
and I don’t see how he could have followed us.’
‘What about the smelling, sir?’ said Sam. ‘And the Gaffer said he
was a black chap.’
‘I wish I had waited for Gandalf,’ Frodo muttered. ‘But perhaps
it would only have made matters worse.’
‘Then you know or guess something about this rider?’ said Pippin,
who had caught the muttered words.
‘I don’t know, and I would rather not guess,’ said Frodo.
‘All right, cousin Frodo! You can keep your secret for the present,
if you want to be mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do?
I should like a bite and a sup, but somehow I think we had better
move on from here. Your talk of snifﬁng riders with invisible noses
has unsettled me.’
‘Yes, I think we will move on now,’ said Frodo; ‘but not on the
road – in case that rider comes back, or another follows him. We
ought to do a good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.’
The shadows of the trees were long and thin on the grass, as they
started off again. They now kept a stone’s throw to the left of the
road, and kept out of sight of it as much as they could. But this
hindered them; for the grass was thick and tussocky, and the ground
uneven, and the trees began to draw together into thickets.
The sun had gone down red behind the hills at their backs, and
evening was coming on before they came back to the road at the end
of the long level over which it had run straight for some miles. At
that point it bent left and went down into the lowlands of the Yale
making for Stock; but a lane branched right, winding through a wood
of ancient oak-trees on its way to Woodhall. ‘That is the way for us,’
said Frodo.
Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk of a

THREE IS COMPANY

77

tree: it was still alive and had leaves on the small branches that it
had put out round the broken stumps of its long-fallen limbs; but it
was hollow, and could be entered by a great crack on the side away
from the road. The hobbits crept inside, and sat there upon a ﬂoor
of old leaves and decayed wood. They rested and had a light meal,
talking quietly and listening from time to time.
Twilight was about them as they crept back to the lane. The West
wind was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the
road began to fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A star came out
above the trees in the darkening East before them. They went abreast
and in step, to keep up their spirits. After a time, as the stars grew
thicker and brighter, the feeling of disquiet left them, and they no
longer listened for the sound of hoofs. They began to hum softly, as
hobbits have a way of doing as they walk along, especially when
they are drawing near to home at night. With most hobbits it is a
supper-song or a bed-song; but these hobbits hummed a walking-song
(though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed).
Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune that was as old as
the hills, and taught it to Frodo as they walked in the lanes of the
Water-valley and talked about Adventure.
Upon the hearth the ﬁre is red,
Beneath the roof there is a bed;
But not yet weary are our feet,
Still round the corner we may meet
A sudden tree or standing stone
That none have seen but we alone.
Tree and ﬂower and leaf and grass,
Let them pass! Let them pass!
Hill and water under sky,
Pass them by! Pass them by!
Still round the corner there may wait
A new road or a secret gate,
And though we pass them by today,
Tomorrow we may come this way
And take the hidden paths that run
Towards the Moon or to the Sun.
Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe,
Let them go! Let them go!
Sand and stone and pool and dell,
Fare you well! Fare you well!

78

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Home is behind, the world ahead,
And there are many paths to tread
Through shadows to the edge of night,
Until the stars are all alight.
Then world behind and home ahead,
We’ll wander back to home and bed.
Mist and twilight, cloud and shade,
Away shall fade! Away shall fade!
Fire and lamp, and meat and bread,
And then to bed! And then to bed!
The song ended. ‘And now to bed! And now to bed!’ sang Pippin
in a high voice.
‘Hush!’ said Frodo. ‘I think I hear hoofs again.’
They stopped suddenly and stood as silent as tree-shadows, listening. There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, some way behind, but
coming slow and clear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they
slipped off the path, and ran into the deeper shade under the oaktrees.
‘Don’t let us go too far!’ said Frodo. ‘I don’t want to be seen, but
I want to see if it is another Black Rider.’
‘Very well!’ said Pippin. ‘But don’t forget the snifﬁng!’
The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to ﬁnd any hiding-place
better than the general darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin
crouched behind a large tree-bole, while Frodo crept back a few yards
towards the lane. It showed grey and pale, a line of fading light
through the wood. Above it the stars were thick in the dim sky, but
there was no moon.
The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something
dark pass across the lighter space between two trees, and then halt.
It looked like the black shade of a horse led by a smaller black shadow.
The black shadow stood close to the point where they had left the
path, and it swayed from side to side. Frodo thought he heard the
sound of snufﬂing. The shadow bent to the ground, and then began
to crawl towards him.
Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but
this time it was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before
he realized what he was doing, his hand was groping in his pocket.
But at that moment there came a sound like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in the starlit air. The black shadow
straightened up and retreated. It climbed on to the shadowy horse
and seemed to vanish across the lane into the darkness on the other
side. Frodo breathed again.
‘Elves!’ exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. ‘Elves, sir!’ He would

THREE IS COMPANY

79

have burst out of the trees and dashed off towards the voices, if they
had not pulled him back.
‘Yes, it is Elves,’ said Frodo. ‘One can meet them sometimes in
the Woody End. They don’t live in the Shire, but they wander into
it in spring and autumn, out of their own lands away beyond the
Tower Hills. I am thankful that they do! You did not see, but that
Black Rider stopped just here and was actually crawling towards us
when the song began. As soon as he heard the voices he slipped
away.’
‘What about the Elves?’ said Sam, too excited to trouble about
the rider. ‘Can’t we go and see them?’
‘Listen! They are coming this way,’ said Frodo. ‘We have only to
wait.’
The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above the
others. It was singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew
only a little, and the others knew nothing. Yet the sound blending
with the melody seemed to shape itself in their thought into words
which they only partly understood. This was the song as Frodo heard
it:
Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear!
O Queen beyond the Western Seas!
O Light to us that wander here
Amid the world of woven trees!
Gilthoniel! O Elbereth!
Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath!
Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee
In a far land beyond the Sea.
O stars that in the Sunless Year
With shining hand by her were sown,
In windy ﬁelds now bright and clear
We see your silver blossom blown!
O Elbereth! Gilthoniel!
We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees,
Thy starlight on the Western Seas.
The song ended. ‘These are High Elves! They spoke the name of
Elbereth!’ said Frodo in amazement. ‘Few of that fairest folk are ever
seen in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth, east of the
Great Sea. This is indeed a strange chance!’

80

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The hobbits sat in shadow by the wayside. Before long the Elves
came down the lane towards the valley. They passed slowly, and the
hobbits could see the starlight glimmering on their hair and in their
eyes. They bore no lights, yet as they walked a shimmer, like the
light of the moon above the rim of the hills before it rises, seemed
to fall about their feet. They were now silent, and as the last Elf
passed he turned and looked towards the hobbits and laughed.
‘Hail, Frodo!’ he cried. ‘You are abroad late. Or are you perhaps
lost?’ Then he called aloud to the others, and all the company stopped
and gathered round.
‘This is indeed wonderful!’ they said. ‘Three hobbits in a wood at
night! We have not seen such a thing since Bilbo went away. What
is the meaning of it?’
‘The meaning of it, fair people,’ said Frodo, ‘is simply that we
seem to be going the same way as you are. I like walking under the
stars. But I would welcome your company.’
‘But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are so dull,’
they laughed. ‘And how do you know that we go the same way as
you, for you do not know whither we are going?’
‘And how do you know my name?’ asked Frodo in return.
‘We know many things,’ they said. ‘We have seen you often before
with Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.’
‘Who are you, and who is your lord?’ asked Frodo.
‘I am Gildor,’ answered their leader, the Elf who had ﬁrst hailed
him. ‘Gildor Inglorion of the House of Finrod. We are Exiles, and
most of our kindred have long ago departed and we too are now only
tarrying here a while, ere we return over the Great Sea. But some of
our kinsfolk dwell still in peace in Rivendell. Come now, Frodo, tell
us what you are doing? For we see that there is some shadow of fear
upon you.’
‘O Wise People!’ interrupted Pippin eagerly. ‘Tell us about the
Black Riders!’
‘Black Riders?’ they said in low voices. ‘Why do you ask about
Black Riders?’
‘Because two Black Riders have overtaken us today, or one has
done so twice,’ said Pippin; ‘only a little while ago he slipped away
as you drew near.’
The Elves did not answer at once, but spoke together softly in
their own tongue. At length Gildor turned to the hobbits. ‘We will
not speak of this here,’ he said. ‘We think you had best come now
with us. It is not our custom, but for this time we will take you on
our road, and you shall lodge with us tonight, if you will.’
‘O Fair Folk! This is good fortune beyond my hope,’ said Pippin.
Sam was speechless. ‘I thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,’ said

THREE IS COMPANY

81

Frodo bowing. ‘Elen sı́la lúmenn’ omentielvo, a star shines on the hour
of our meeting,’ he added in the High-elven speech.
‘Be careful, friends!’ cried Gildor laughing. ‘Speak no secrets! Here
is a scholar in the Ancient Tongue. Bilbo was a good master. Hail,
Elf-friend!’ he said, bowing to Frodo. ‘Come now with your friends
and join our company! You had best walk in the middle so that you
may not stray. You may be weary before we halt.’
‘Why? Where are you going?’ asked Frodo.
‘For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall. It
is some miles, but you shall have rest at the end of it, and it will
shorten your journey tomorrow.’
They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows
and faint lights: for Elves (even more than hobbits) could walk when
they wished without sound or footfall. Pippin soon began to feel
sleepy, and staggered once or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his
side put out his arm and saved him from a fall. Sam walked along
at Frodo’s side, as if in a dream, with an expression on his face half
of fear and half of astonished joy.
The woods on either side became denser; the trees were now
younger and thicker; and as the lane went lower, running down into a
fold of the hills, there were many deep brakes of hazel on the rising
slopes at either hand. At last the Elves turned aside from the path. A
green ride lay almost unseen through the thickets on the right; and this
they followed as it wound away back up the wooded slopes on to the
top of a shoulder of the hills that stood out into the lower land of the
river-valley. Suddenly they came out of the shadow of the trees, and
before them lay a wide space of grass, grey under the night. On three
sides the woods pressed upon it; but eastward the ground fell steeply
and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of the slope, were
below their feet. Beyond, the low lands lay dim and ﬂat under the stars.
Nearer at hand a few lights twinkled in the village of Woodhall.
The Elves sat on the grass and spoke together in soft voices; they
seemed to take no further notice of the hobbits. Frodo and his companions wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets, and drowsiness
stole over them. The night grew on, and the lights in the valley went
out. Pippin fell asleep, pillowed on a green hillock.
Away high in the East swung Remmirath, the Netted Stars, and
slowly above the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of ﬁre.
Then by some shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil,
and there leaned up, as he climbed over the rim of the world, the
Swordsman of the Sky, Menelvagor with his shining belt. The Elves
all burst into song. Suddenly under the trees a ﬁre sprang up with a
red light.

82

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Come!’ the Elves called to the hobbits. ‘Come! Now is the time
for speech and merriment!’
Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. ‘There is a ﬁre in
the hall, and food for hungry guests,’ said an Elf standing before him.
At the south end of the greensward there was an opening. There
the green ﬂoor ran on into the wood, and formed a wide space like
a hall, roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like
pillars down each side. In the middle there was a wood-ﬁre blazing,
and upon the tree-pillars torches with lights of gold and silver were
burning steadily. The Elves sat round the ﬁre upon the grass or upon
the sawn rings of old trunks. Some went to and fro bearing cups and
pouring drink; others brought food on heaped plates and dishes.
‘This is poor fare,’ they said to the hobbits; ‘for we are lodging in
the greenwood far from our halls. If ever you are our guests at home,
we will treat you better.’
‘It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,’ said Frodo.
Pippin afterwards recalled little of either food or drink, for his
mind was ﬁlled with the light upon the elf-faces, and the sound of
voices so various and so beautiful that he felt in a waking dream. But
he remembered that there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair
white loaf to one who is starving; and fruits sweet as wildberries and
richer than the tended fruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was
ﬁlled with a fragrant draught, cool as a clear fountain, golden as a
summer afternoon.
Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself,
what he felt or thought that night, though it remained in his memory
as one of the chief events of his life. The nearest he ever got was to
say: ‘Well, sir, if I could grow apples like that, I would call myself a
gardener. But it was the singing that went to my heart, if you know
what I mean.’
Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind
was chieﬂy on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech
and listened eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served
him and thanked them in their own language. They smiled at him
and said laughing: ‘Here is a jewel among hobbits!’
After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne
away to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed
and slept the rest of the night away. Sam refused to leave his master.
When Pippin had gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo’s feet,
where at last he nodded and closed his eyes. Frodo remained long
awake, talking with Gildor.
They spoke of many things, old and new, and Frodo questioned
Gildor much about happenings in the wide world outside the Shire.

THREE IS COMPANY

83

The tidings were mostly sad and ominous: of gathering darkness, the
wars of Men, and the ﬂight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked the
question that was nearest to his heart:
‘Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?’
Gildor smiled. ‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘Twice. He said farewell to us
on this very spot. But I saw him once again, far from here.’ He would
say no more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent.
‘You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,’
said Gildor. ‘But I already know a little, and I can read more in your
face and in the thought behind your questions. You are leaving the
Shire, and yet you doubt that you will ﬁnd what you seek, or accomplish what you intend, or that you will ever return. Is not that so?’
‘It is,’ said Frodo; ‘but I thought my going was a secret known
only to Gandalf and my faithful Sam.’ He looked down at Sam, who
was snoring gently.
‘The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,’ said Gildor.
‘The Enemy?’ said Frodo. ‘Then you know why I am leaving the
Shire?’
‘I do not know for what reason the Enemy is pursuing you,’
answered Gildor; ‘but I perceive that he is – strange indeed though
that seems to me. And I warn you that peril is now both before you
and behind you, and upon either side.’
‘You mean the Riders? I feared that they were servants of the
Enemy. What are the Black Riders?’
‘Has Gandalf told you nothing?’
‘Nothing about such creatures.’
‘Then I think it is not for me to say more – lest terror should keep
you from your journey. For it seems to me that you have set out only
just in time, if indeed you are in time. You must now make haste, and
neither stay nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to
you.’
‘I cannot imagine what information could be more terrifying than
your hints and warnings,’ exclaimed Frodo. ‘I knew that danger lay
ahead, of course; but I did not expect to meet it in our own Shire.
Can’t a hobbit walk from the Water to the River in peace?’
‘But it is not your own Shire,’ said Gildor. ‘Others dwelt here
before hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are
no more. The wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in,
but you cannot for ever fence it out.’
‘I know – and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What
can I do now? My plan was to leave the Shire secretly, and make my
way to Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get
to Buckland.’
‘I think you should still follow that plan,’ said Gildor. ‘I do not

84

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

think the Road will prove too hard for your courage. But if you desire
clearer counsel, you should ask Gandalf. I do not know the reason
for your ﬂight, and therefore I do not know by what means your
pursuers will assail you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose
that you will see him before you leave the Shire?’
‘I hope so. But that is another thing that makes me anxious. I
have been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come
to Hobbiton at the latest two nights ago; but he has never appeared.
Now I am wondering what can have happened. Should I wait for
him?’
Gildor was silent for a moment. ‘I do not like this news,’ he said
at last. ‘That Gandalf should be late, does not bode well. But it is
said: Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and
quick to anger. The choice is yours: to go or wait.’
‘And it is also said,’ answered Frodo: ‘Go not to the Elves for counsel,
for they will say both no and yes.’
‘Is it indeed?’ laughed Gildor. ‘Elves seldom give unguarded
advice, for advice is a dangerous gift, even from the wise to the wise,
and all courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told
me all concerning yourself; and how then shall I choose better than
you? But if you demand advice, I will for friendship’s sake give it. I
think you should now go at once, without delay; and if Gandalf does
not come before you set out, then I also advise this: do not go alone.
Take such friends as are trusty and willing. Now you should be
grateful, for I do not give this counsel gladly. The Elves have their
own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little concerned
with the ways of hobbits, or of any other creatures upon earth. Our
paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting there
may be more than chance; but the purpose is not clear to me, and I
fear to say too much.’
‘I am deeply grateful,’ said Frodo; ‘but I wish you would tell me
plainly what the Black Riders are. If I take your advice I may not see
Gandalf for a long while, and I ought to know what is the danger
that pursues me.’
‘Is it not enough to know that they are servants of the Enemy?’
answered Gildor. ‘Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are
deadly. Ask no more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is
ended, you, Frodo son of Drogo, will know more of these fell things
than Gildor Inglorion. May Elbereth protect you!’
‘But where shall I ﬁnd courage?’ asked Frodo. ‘That is what I
chieﬂy need.’
‘Courage is found in unlikely places,’ said Gildor. ‘Be of good
hope! Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but we will
send our messages through the lands. The Wandering Companies

THREE IS COMPANY

85

shall know of your journey, and those that have power for good shall
be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend; and may the stars shine upon
the end of your road! Seldom have we had such delight in strangers,
and it is fair to hear words of the Ancient Speech from the lips of
other wanderers in the world.’
Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor ﬁnished speaking. ‘I will sleep now,’ he said; and the Elf led him to a bower beside
Pippin, and he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a
dreamless slumber.

Chapter 4
A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS
In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in a bower made
by a living tree with branches laced and drooping to the ground; his
bed was of fern and grass, deep and soft and strangely fragrant. The
sun was shining through the ﬂuttering leaves, which were still green
upon the tree. He jumped up and went out.
Sam was sitting on the grass near the edge of the wood. Pippin
was standing studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the
Elves.
‘They have left us fruit and drink, and bread,’ said Pippin. ‘Come
and have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did
last night. I did not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted.’
Frodo sat down beside Sam and began to eat. ‘What is the plan
for today?’ asked Pippin.
‘To walk to Bucklebury as quickly as possible,’ answered Frodo,
and gave his attention to the food.
‘Do you think we shall see anything of those Riders?’ asked Pippin
cheerfully. Under the morning sun the prospect of seeing a whole
troop of them did not seem very alarming to him.
‘Yes, probably,’ said Frodo, not liking the reminder. ‘But I hope
to get across the river without their seeing us.’
‘Did you ﬁnd out anything about them from Gildor?’
‘Not much – only hints and riddles,’ said Frodo evasively.
‘Did you ask about the snifﬁng?’
‘We didn’t discuss it,’ said Frodo with his mouth full.
‘You should have. I am sure it is very important.’
‘In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused to explain it,’ said
Frodo sharply. ‘And now leave me in peace for a bit! I don’t want to
answer a string of questions while I am eating. I want to think!’
‘Good heavens!’ said Pippin. ‘At breakfast?’ He walked away
towards the edge of the green.
From Frodo’s mind the bright morning – treacherously bright, he
thought – had not banished the fear of pursuit; and he pondered the
words of Gildor. The merry voice of Pippin came to him. He was
running on the green turf and singing.
‘No! I could not!’ he said to himself. ‘It is one thing to take my
young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry
and weary, and food and bed are sweet. To take them into exile,
where hunger and weariness may have no cure, is quite another –

A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS

87

even if they are willing to come. The inheritance is mine alone. I
don’t think I ought even to take Sam.’ He looked at Sam Gamgee,
and discovered that Sam was watching him.
‘Well, Sam!’ he said. ‘What about it? I am leaving the Shire as
soon as ever I can – in fact I have made up my mind now not even
to wait a day at Crickhollow, if it can be helped.’
‘Very good, sir!’
‘You still mean to come with me?’
‘I do.’
‘It is going to be very dangerous, Sam. It is already dangerous.
Most likely neither of us will come back.’
‘If you don’t come back, sir, then I shan’t, that’s certain,’ said
Sam. ‘Don’t you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never
mean to. I am going with him, if he climbs to the Moon; and if any of
those Black Riders try to stop him, they’ll have Sam Gamgee to reckon
with, I said. They laughed.’
‘Who are they, and what are you talking about?’
‘The Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and they seemed to
know you were going away, so I didn’t see the use of denying it.
Wonderful folk, Elves, sir! Wonderful!’
‘They are,’ said Frodo. ‘Do you like them still, now you have had
a closer view?’
‘They seem a bit above my likes and dislikes, so to speak,’ answered
Sam slowly. ‘It don’t seem to matter what I think about them. They
are quite different from what I expected – so old and young, and so
gay and sad, as it were.’
Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some
outward sign of the odd change that seemed to have come over him.
It did not sound like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought
he knew. But it looked like the old Sam Gamgee sitting there, except
that his face was unusually thoughtful.
‘Do you feel any need to leave the Shire now – now that your wish
to see them has come true already?’ he asked.
‘Yes, sir. I don’t know how to say it, but after last night I feel
different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind of way. I know we are going
to take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can’t turn back.
It isn’t to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that I want –
I don’t rightly know what I want: but I have something to do before
the end, and it lies ahead, not in the Shire. I must see it through,
sir, if you understand me.’
‘I don’t altogether. But I understand that Gandalf chose me a
good companion. I am content. We will go together.’
Frodo ﬁnished his breakfast in silence. Then standing up he looked
over the land ahead, and called to Pippin.

88

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘All ready to start?’ he said as Pippin ran up. ‘We must be getting
off at once. We slept late; and there are a good many miles to go.’
‘You slept late, you mean,’ said Pippin. ‘I was up long before; and
we are only waiting for you to ﬁnish eating and thinking.’
‘I have ﬁnished both now. And I am going to make for Bucklebury
Ferry as quickly as possible. I am not going out of the way, back to
the road we left last night: I am going to cut straight across country
from here.’
‘Then you are going to ﬂy,’ said Pippin. ‘You won’t cut straight
on foot anywhere in this country.’
‘We can cut straighter than the road anyway,’ answered Frodo.
‘The Ferry is east from Woodhall; but the hard road curves away to
the left – you can see a bend of it away north over there. It goes
round the north end of the Marish so as to strike the causeway from
the Bridge above Stock. But that is miles out of the way. We could
save a quarter of the distance if we made a line for the Ferry from
where we stand.’
‘Short cuts make long delays,’ argued Pippin. ‘The country is rough
round here, and there are bogs and all kinds of difﬁculties down in
the Marish – I know the land in these parts. And if you are worrying
about Black Riders, I can’t see that it is any worse meeting them on
a road than in a wood or a ﬁeld.’
‘It is less easy to ﬁnd people in the woods and ﬁelds,’ answered
Frodo. ‘And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some
chance that you will be looked for on the road and not off it.’
‘All right!’ said Pippin. ‘I will follow you into every bog and ditch.
But it is hard! I had counted on passing the Golden Perch at Stock
before sundown. The best beer in the Eastfarthing, or used to be: it
is a long time since I tasted it.’
‘That settles it!’ said Frodo. ‘Short cuts make delays, but inns
make longer ones. At all costs we must keep you away from the
Golden Perch. We want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do
you say, Sam?’
‘I will go along with you, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam (in spite of private
misgivings and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing).
‘Then if we are going to toil through bog and briar, let’s go now!’
said Pippin.
It was already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but
clouds were beginning to come up from the West. It looked likely to
turn to rain. The hobbits scrambled down a steep green bank and
plunged into the thick trees below. Their course had been chosen to
leave Woodhall to their left, and to cut slanting through the woods
that clustered along the eastern side of the hills, until they reached

A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS

89

the ﬂats beyond. Then they could make straight for the Ferry over
country that was open, except for a few ditches and fences. Frodo
reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line.
He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than
it had appeared. There were no paths in the undergrowth, and they
did not get on very fast. When they had struggled to the bottom of
the bank, they found a stream running down from the hills behind
in a deeply dug bed with steep slippery sides overhung with brambles.
Most inconveniently it cut across the line they had chosen. They
could not jump over it, nor indeed get across it at all without getting
wet, scratched, and muddy. They halted, wondering what to do.
‘First check!’ said Pippin, smiling grimly.
Sam Gamgee looked back. Through an opening in the trees he
caught a glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had
climbed down.
‘Look!’ he said, clutching Frodo by the arm. They all looked, and
on the edge high above them they saw against the sky a horse standing.
Beside it stooped a black ﬁgure.
They at once gave up any idea of going back. Frodo led the way,
and plunged quickly into the thick bushes beside the stream. ‘Whew!’
he said to Pippin. ‘We were both right! The short cut has gone
crooked already; but we got under cover only just in time. You’ve
got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear anything coming?’
They stood still, almost holding their breath as they listened; but
there was no sound of pursuit. ‘I don’t fancy he would try bringing
his horse down that bank,’ said Sam. ‘But I guess he knows we came
down it. We had better be going on.’
Going on was not altogether easy. They had packs to carry, and
the bushes and brambles were reluctant to let them through. They
were cut off from the wind by the ridge behind, and the air was still
and stuffy. When they forced their way at last into more open ground,
they were hot and tired and very scratched, and they were also no
longer certain of the direction in which they were going. The banks
of the stream sank, as it reached the levels and became broader and
shallower, wandering off towards the Marish and the River.
‘Why, this is the Stock-brook!’ said Pippin. ‘If we are going to try
and get back on to our course, we must cross at once and bear right.’
They waded the stream, and hurried over a wide open space,
rush-grown and treeless, on the further side. Beyond that they came
again to a belt of trees: tall oaks, for the most part, with here and
there an elm tree or an ash. The ground was fairly level, and there
was little undergrowth; but the trees were too close for them to see
far ahead. The leaves blew upwards in sudden gusts of wind, and
spots of rain began to fall from the overcast sky. Then the wind died

90

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

away and the rain came streaming down. They trudged along as fast
as they could, over patches of grass, and through thick drifts of old
leaves; and all about them the rain pattered and trickled. They did
not talk, but kept glancing back, and from side to side.
After half an hour Pippin said: ‘I hope we have not turned too
much towards the south, and are not walking longwise through this
wood! It is not a very broad belt – I should have said no more than
a mile at the widest – and we ought to have been through it by now.’
‘It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,’ said Frodo. ‘That
won’t mend matters. Let us keep on as we are going! I am not sure
that I want to come out into the open yet.’
They went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then the sun
gleamed out of ragged clouds again and the rain lessened. It was now
past mid-day, and they felt it was high time for lunch. They halted
under an elm tree: its leaves though fast turning yellow were still
thick, and the ground at its feet was fairly dry and sheltered. When
they came to make their meal, they found that the Elves had ﬁlled
their bottles with a clear drink, pale golden in colour: it had the scent
of a honey made of many ﬂowers, and was wonderfully refreshing.
Very soon they were laughing, and snapping their ﬁngers at rain, and
at Black Riders. The last few miles, they felt, would soon be behind
them.
Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes.
Sam and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing
softly:
Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go
To heal my heart and drown my woe.
Rain may fall and wind may blow,
And many miles be still to go,
But under a tall tree I will lie,
And let the clouds go sailing by.
Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly.
Frodo sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came down the wind,
like the cry of some evil and lonely creature. It rose and fell, and
ended on a high piercing note. Even as they sat and stood, as if
suddenly frozen, it was answered by another cry, fainter and further
off, but no less chilling to the blood. There was then a silence, broken
only by the sound of the wind in the leaves.
‘And what do you think that was?’ Pippin asked at last, trying to
speak lightly, but quavering a little. ‘If it was a bird, it was one that
I never heard in the Shire before.’

A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS

91

‘It was not bird or beast,’ said Frodo. ‘It was a call, or a signal –
there were words in that cry, though I could not catch them. But no
hobbit has such a voice.’
No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders,
but no one spoke of them. They were now reluctant either to stay
or go on; but sooner or later they had got to get across the open
country to the Ferry, and it was best to go sooner and in daylight.
In a few moments they had shouldered their packs again and were
off.
Before long the wood came to a sudden end. Wide grass-lands
stretched before them. They now saw that they had, in fact, turned
too much to the south. Away over the ﬂats they could glimpse the
low hill of Bucklebury across the River, but it was now to their left.
Creeping cautiously out from the edge of the trees, they set off across
the open as quickly as they could.
At ﬁrst they felt afraid, away from the shelter of the wood. Far
back behind them stood the high place where they had breakfasted.
Frodo half expected to see the small distant ﬁgure of a horseman on
the ridge dark against the sky; but there was no sign of one. The sun
escaping from the breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they
had left, was now shining brightly again. Their fear left them, though
they still felt uneasy. But the land became steadily more tame and
well-ordered. Soon they came into well-tended ﬁelds and meadows:
there were hedges and gates and dikes for drainage. Everything
seemed quiet and peaceful, just an ordinary corner of the Shire. Their
spirits rose with every step. The line of the River grew nearer; and
the Black Riders began to seem like phantoms of the woods now left
far behind.
They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-ﬁeld, and came to a
stout gate. Beyond it a rutted lane ran between low well-laid hedges
towards a distant clump of trees. Pippin stopped.
‘I know these ﬁelds and this gate!’ he said. ‘This is Bamfurlong,
old Farmer Maggot’s land. That’s his farm away there in the trees.’
‘One trouble after another!’ said Frodo, looking nearly as much
alarmed as if Pippin had declared the lane was the slot leading to a
dragon’s den. The others looked at him in surprise.
‘What’s wrong with old Maggot?’ asked Pippin. ‘He’s a good friend
to all the Brandybucks. Of course he’s a terror to trespassers, and
keeps ferocious dogs – but after all, folk down here are near the
border and have to be more on their guard.’
‘I know,’ said Frodo. ‘But all the same,’ he added with a shamefaced laugh, ‘I am terriﬁed of him and his dogs. I have avoided his
farm for years and years. He caught me several times trespassing after

92

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

mushrooms, when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last
occasion he beat me, and then took me and showed me to his dogs.
‘‘See, lads,’’ he said, ‘‘next time this young varmint sets foot on my
land, you can eat him. Now see him off !’’ They chased me all the
way to the Ferry. I have never got over the fright – though I daresay
the beasts knew their business and would not really have touched
me.’
Pippin laughed. ‘Well, it’s time you made it up. Especially if you
are coming back to live in Buckland. Old Maggot is really a stout
fellow – if you leave his mushrooms alone. Let’s get into the lane
and then we shan’t be trespassing. If we meet him, I’ll do the talking.
He is a friend of Merry’s, and I used to come here with him a good
deal at one time.’
They went along the lane, until they saw the thatched roofs of a
large house and farm-buildings peeping out among the trees ahead.
The Maggots, and the Puddifoots of Stock, and most of the inhabitants of the Marish, were house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly
built of brick and had a high wall all round it. There was a wide
wooden gate opening out of the wall into the lane.
Suddenly as they drew nearer a terriﬁc baying and barking broke
out, and a loud voice was heard shouting: ‘Grip! Fang! Wolf ! Come
on, lads!’
Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked on a few paces.
The gate opened and three huge dogs came pelting out into the lane,
and dashed towards the travellers, barking ﬁercely. They took no
notice of Pippin; but Sam shrank against the wall, while two wolvishlooking dogs sniffed at him suspiciously, and snarled if he moved.
The largest and most ferocious of the three halted in front of Frodo,
bristling and growling.
Through the gate there now appeared a broad thick-set hobbit
with a round red face. ‘Hallo! Hallo! And who may you be, and what
may you be wanting?’ he asked.
‘Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!’ said Pippin.
The farmer looked at him closely. ‘Well, if it isn’t Master Pippin
– Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!’ he cried, changing from a scowl
to a grin. ‘It’s a long time since I saw you round here. It’s lucky for
you that I know you. I was just going out to set my dogs on any
strangers. There are some funny things going on today. Of course,
we do get queer folk wandering in these parts at times. Too near
the River,’ he said, shaking his head. ‘But this fellow was the most
outlandish I have ever set eyes on. He won’t cross my land without
leave a second time, not if I can stop it.’
‘What fellow do you mean?’ asked Pippin.

A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS

93

‘Then you haven’t seen him?’ said the farmer. ‘He went up the
lane towards the causeway not a long while back. He was a funny
customer and asking funny questions. But perhaps you’ll come along
inside, and we’ll pass the news more comfortable. I’ve a drop of good
ale on tap, if you and your friends are willing, Mr. Took.’
It seemed plain that the farmer would tell them more, if allowed
to do it in his own time and fashion, so they all accepted the invitation.
‘What about the dogs?’ asked Frodo anxiously.
The farmer laughed. ‘They won’t harm you – not unless I tell ’em
to. Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!’ he cried. ‘Heel, Wolf !’ To the relief of
Frodo and Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free.
Pippin introduced the other two to the farmer. ‘Mr. Frodo Baggins,’
he said. ‘You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy
Hall.’ At the name Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a
sharp glance. For a moment Frodo thought that the memory of stolen
mushrooms had been aroused, and that the dogs would be told to
see him off. But Farmer Maggot took him by the arm.
‘Well, if that isn’t queerer than ever!’ he exclaimed. ‘Mr. Baggins
is it? Come inside! We must have a talk.’
They went into the farmer’s kitchen, and sat by the wide ﬁre-place.
Mrs. Maggot brought out beer in a huge jug, and ﬁlled four large
mugs. It was a good brew, and Pippin found himself more than
compensated for missing the Golden Perch. Sam sipped his beer suspiciously. He had a natural mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts
of the Shire; and also he was not disposed to be quick friends with
anyone who had beaten his master, however long ago.
After a few remarks about the weather and the agricultural prospects (which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot put down
his mug and looked at them all in turn.
‘Now, Mr. Peregrin,’ he said, ‘where might you be coming from,
and where might you be going to? Were you coming to visit me? For,
if so, you had gone past my gate without my seeing you.’
‘Well, no,’ answered Pippin. ‘To tell you the truth, since you have
guessed it, we got into the lane from the other end: we had come
over your ﬁelds. But that was quite by accident. We lost our way in
the woods, back near Woodhall, trying to take a short cut to the
Ferry.’
‘If you were in a hurry, the road would have served you better,’
said the farmer. ‘But I wasn’t worrying about that. You have leave
to walk over my land, if you have a mind, Mr. Peregrin. And you,
Mr. Baggins – though I daresay you still like mushrooms.’ He laughed.
‘Ah yes, I recognized the name. I recollect the time when young
Frodo Baggins was one of the worst young rascals of Buckland. But
it wasn’t mushrooms I was thinking of. I had just heard the name

94

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Baggins before you turned up. What do you think that funny customer
asked me?’
They waited anxiously for him to go on. ‘Well,’ the farmer continued, approaching his point with slow relish, ‘he came riding on a
big black horse in at the gate, which happened to be open, and right
up to my door. All black he was himself, too, and cloaked and hooded
up, as if he did not want to be known. ‘‘Now what in the Shire can
he want?’’ I thought to myself. We don’t see many of the Big Folk
over the border; and anyway I had never heard of any like this black
fellow.
‘ ‘‘Good-day to you!’’ I says, going out to him. ‘‘This lane don’t
lead anywhere, and wherever you may be going, your quickest way
will be back to the road.’’ I didn’t like the looks of him; and when
Grip came out, he took one sniff and let out a yelp as if he had been
stung: he put down his tail and bolted off howling. The black fellow
sat quite still.
‘ ‘‘I come from yonder,’’ he said, slow and stiff-like, pointing back
west, over my ﬁelds, if you please. ‘‘Have you seen Baggins?’’ he
asked in a queer voice, and bent down towards me. I could not see
any face, for his hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver
down my back. But I did not see why he should come riding over
my land so bold.
‘ ‘‘Be off !’’ I said. ‘‘There are no Bagginses here. You’re in the
wrong part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton
– but you can go by road this time.’’
‘ ‘‘Baggins has left,’’ he answered in a whisper. ‘‘He is coming. He
is not far away. I wish to ﬁnd him. If he passes will you tell me? I
will come back with gold.’’
‘ ‘‘No you won’t,’’ I said. ‘‘You’ll go back where you belong,
double quick. I give you one minute before I call all my dogs.’’
‘He gave a sort of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might
not. Then he spurred his great horse right at me, and I jumped out
of the way only just in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and
rode through the gate and up the lane towards the causeway like a
bolt of thunder. What do you think of that?’
Frodo sat for a moment looking at the ﬁre, but his only thought
was how on earth would they reach the Ferry. ‘I don’t know what
to think,’ he said at last.
‘Then I’ll tell you what to think,’ said Maggot. ‘You should never
have gone mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo. Folk
are queer up there.’ Sam stirred in his chair, and looked at the farmer
with an unfriendly eye. ‘But you were always a reckless lad. When I
heard you had left the Brandybucks and gone off to that old Mr.
Bilbo, I said that you were going to ﬁnd trouble. Mark my words,

A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS

95

this all comes of those strange doings of Mr. Bilbo’s. His money was
got in some strange fashion in foreign parts, they say. Maybe there
is some that want to know what has become of the gold and jewels
that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?’
Frodo said nothing: the shrewd guesses of the farmer were rather
disconcerting.
‘Well, Mr. Frodo,’ Maggot went on, ‘I’m glad that you’ve had the
sense to come back to Buckland. My advice is: stay there! And don’t
get mixed up with these outlandish folk. You’ll have friends in these
parts. If any of these black fellows come after you again, I’ll deal
with them. I’ll say you’re dead, or have left the Shire, or anything
you like. And that might be true enough; for as like as not it is old
Mr. Bilbo they want news of.’
‘Maybe you’re right,’ said Frodo, avoiding the farmer’s eye and
staring at the ﬁre.
Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. ‘Well, I see you have ideas of
your own,’ he said. ‘It is as plain as my nose that no accident brought
you and that rider here on the same afternoon; and maybe my news
was no great news to you, after all. I am not asking you to tell me
anything you have a mind to keep to yourself; but I see you are in
some kind of trouble. Perhaps you are thinking it won’t be too easy
to get to the Ferry without being caught?’
‘I was thinking so,’ said Frodo. ‘But we have got to try and get
there; and it won’t be done by sitting and thinking. So I am afraid
we must be going. Thank you very much indeed for your kindness!
I’ve been in terror of you and your dogs for over thirty years, Farmer
Maggot, though you may laugh to hear it. It’s a pity: for I’ve missed
a good friend. And now I’m sorry to leave so soon. But I’ll come
back, perhaps, one day – if I get a chance.’
‘You’ll be welcome when you come,’ said Maggot. ‘But now I’ve
a notion. It’s near sundown already, and we are going to have our
supper; for we mostly go to bed soon after the Sun. If you and Mr.
Peregrin and all could stay and have a bite with us, we would be
pleased!’
‘And so should we!’ said Frodo. ‘But we must be going at once,
I’m afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.’
‘Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of supper,
I’ll get out a small waggon, and I’ll drive you all to the Ferry. That
will save you a good step, and it might also save you trouble of
another sort.’
Frodo now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief of Pippin
and Sam. The sun was already behind the western hills, and the light
was failing. Two of Maggot’s sons and his three daughters came in,
and a generous supper was laid on the large table. The kitchen was

96

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

lit with candles and the ﬁre was mended. Mrs. Maggot bustled in
and out. One or two other hobbits belonging to the farm-household
came in. In a short while fourteen sat down to eat. There was beer
in plenty, and a mighty dish of mushrooms and bacon, besides much
other solid farmhouse fare. The dogs lay by the ﬁre and gnawed rinds
and cracked bones.
When they had ﬁnished, the farmer and his sons went out with a
lantern and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the
guests came out. They threw their packs on board and climbed in.
The farmer sat in the driving-seat, and whipped up his two stout
ponies. His wife stood in the light of the open door.
‘You be careful of yourself, Maggot!’ she called. ‘Don’t go arguing
with any foreigners, and come straight back!’
‘I will!’ said he, and drove out of the gate. There was now no
breath of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was
in the air. They went without lights and took it slowly. After a mile
or two the lane came to an end, crossing a deep dike, and climbing
a short slope up on to the high-banked causeway.
Maggot got down and took a good look either way, north and
south, but nothing could be seen in the darkness, and there was not
a sound in the still air. Thin strands of river-mist were hanging above
the dikes, and crawling over the ﬁelds.
‘It’s going to be thick,’ said Maggot; ‘but I’ll not light my lanterns
till I turn for home. We’ll hear anything on the road long before we
meet it tonight.’
It was ﬁve miles or more from Maggot’s lane to the Ferry. The
hobbits wrapped themselves up, but their ears were strained for any
sound above the creak of the wheels and the slow clop of the ponies’
hoofs. The waggon seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him
Pippin was nodding towards sleep; but Sam was staring forwards
into the rising fog.
They reached the entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked
by two tall white posts that suddenly loomed up on their right. Farmer
Maggot drew in his ponies and the waggon creaked to a halt. They
were just beginning to scramble out, when suddenly they heard what
they had all been dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was
coming towards them.
Maggot jumped down and stood holding the ponies’ heads, and
peering forward into the gloom. Clip-clop, clip-clop came the approaching rider. The fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air.
‘You’d better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam anxiously. ‘You
get down in the waggon and cover up with blankets, and we’ll send
this rider to the rightabouts!’ He climbed out and went to the farmer’s

A SHORT CUT TO MUSHROOMS

97

side. Black Riders would have to ride over him to get near the waggon.
Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was nearly on them.
‘Hallo there!’ called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped
short. They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in
the mist, a yard or two ahead.
‘Now then!’ said the farmer, throwing the reins to Sam and striding
forward. ‘Don’t you come a step nearer! What do you want, and
where are you going?’
‘I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?’ said a mufﬂed voice –
but the voice was the voice of Merry Brandybuck. A dark lantern
was uncovered, and its light fell on the astonished face of the farmer.
‘Mr. Merry!’ he cried.
‘Yes, of course! Who did you think it was?’ said Merry coming
forward. As he came out of the mist and their fears subsided, he
seemed suddenly to diminish to ordinary hobbit-size. He was riding
a pony, and a scarf was swathed round his neck and over his chin to
keep out the fog.
Frodo sprang out of the waggon to greet him. ‘So there you are
at last!’ said Merry. ‘I was beginning to wonder if you would turn
up at all today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew
foggy I came across and rode up towards Stock to see if you had
fallen in any ditches. But I’m blest if I know which way you have
come. Where did you ﬁnd them, Mr. Maggot? In your duck-pond?’
‘No, I caught ’em trespassing,’ said the farmer, ‘and nearly set my
dogs on ’em; but they’ll tell you all the story, I’ve no doubt. Now,
if you’ll excuse me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and all, I’d best be
turning for home. Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night
getting thick.’
He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. ‘Well, good
night to you all,’ he said. ‘It’s been a queer day, and no mistake. But
all’s well as ends well; though perhaps we should not say that until
we reach our own doors. I’ll not deny that I’ll be glad now when I
do.’ He lit his lanterns, and got up. Suddenly he produced a large
basket from under the seat. ‘I was nearly forgetting,’ he said. ‘Mrs.
Maggot put this up for Mr. Baggins, with her compliments.’ He
handed it down and moved off, followed by a chorus of thanks and
good-nights.
They watched the pale rings of light round his lanterns as they
dwindled into the foggy night. Suddenly Frodo laughed: from the
covered basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising.

Chapter 5
A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED
‘Now we had better get home ourselves,’ said Merry. ‘There’s something funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.’
They turned down the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept
and edged with large white-washed stones. In a hundred yards or so
it brought them to the river-bank, where there was a broad wooden
landing-stage. A large ﬂat ferry-boat was moored beside it. The white
bollards near the water’s edge glimmered in the light of two lamps
on high posts. Behind them the mists in the ﬂat ﬁelds were now
above the hedges; but the water before them was dark, with only a
few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by the bank. There
seemed to be less fog on the further side.
Merry led the pony over a gangway on to the ferry, and the others
followed. Merry then pushed slowly off with a long pole. The Brandywine ﬂowed slow and broad before them. On the other side the bank
was steep, and up it a winding path climbed from the further landing.
Lamps were twinkling there. Behind loomed up the Buck Hill; and
out of it, through stray shrouds of mist, shone many round windows,
yellow and red. They were the windows of Brandy Hall, the ancient
home of the Brandybucks.
Long ago Gorhendad Oldbuck, head of the Oldbuck family, one
of the oldest in the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed the
river, which was the original boundary of the land eastwards. He
built (and excavated) Brandy Hall, changed his name to Brandybuck,
and settled down to become master of what was virtually a small
independent country. His family grew and grew, and after his days
continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied the whole of the low
hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors, and about a
hundred windows. The Brandybucks and their numerous dependants
then began to burrow, and later to build, all round about. That was
the origin of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river
and the Old Forest, a sort of colony from the Shire. Its chief village
was Bucklebury, clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy
Hall.
The people in the Marish were friendly with the Bucklanders, and
the authority of the Master of the Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck
family was called) was still acknowledged by the farmers between
Stock and Rushey. But most of the folk of the old Shire regarded

A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED

99

the Bucklanders as peculiar, half foreigners as it were. Though, as a
matter of fact, they were not very different from the other hobbits of
the Four Farthings. Except in one point: they were fond of boats,
and some of them could swim.
Their land was originally unprotected from the East; but on that
side they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been planted many
generations ago, and was now thick and tall, for it was constantly
tended. It ran all the way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop
curving away from the river, to Haysend (where the Withywindle
ﬂowed out of the Forest into the Brandywine): well over twenty miles
from end to end. But, of course, it was not a complete protection.
The Forest drew close to the hedge in many places. The Bucklanders
kept their doors locked after dark, and that also was not usual in the
Shire.
The ferry-boat moved slowly across the water. The Buckland shore
drew nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not
been over the river before. He had a strange feeling as the slow
gurgling stream slipped by: his old life lay behind in the mists, dark
adventure lay in front. He scratched his head, and for a moment had
a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone on living quietly at
Bag End.
The four hobbits stepped off the ferry. Merry was tying it up, and
Pippin was already leading the pony up the path, when Sam (who
had been looking back, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a
hoarse whisper:
‘Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?’
On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just make
out a ﬁgure: it looked like a dark black bundle left behind. But as
they looked it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if
searching the ground. It then crawled, or went crouching, back into
the gloom beyond the lamps.
‘What in the Shire is that?’ exclaimed Merry.
‘Something that is following us,’ said Frodo. ‘But don’t ask any
more now! Let’s get away at once!’ They hurried up the path to the
top of the bank, but when they looked back the far shore was shrouded
in mist, and nothing could be seen.
‘Thank goodness you don’t keep any boats on the west-bank!’ said
Frodo. ‘Can horses cross the river?’
‘They can go ten miles north to Brandywine Bridge – or they
might swim,’ answered Merry. ‘Though I never heard of any horse
swimming the Brandywine. But what have horses to do with it?’
‘I’ll tell you later. Let’s get indoors and then we can talk.’
‘All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I’ll just ride on and

100

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

tell Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We’ll see about supper and
things.’
‘We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,’ said Frodo; ‘but
we could do with another.’
‘You shall have it! Give me that basket!’ said Merry, and rode
ahead into the darkness.
It was some distance from the Brandywine to Frodo’s new house
at Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left,
and on the outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland
that ran south from the Bridge. Half a mile northward along this they
came to a lane opening on their right. This they followed for a couple
of miles as it climbed up and down into the country.
At last they came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could
be seen of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the
middle of a wide circle of lawn surrounded by a belt of low trees
inside the outer hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an
out-of-the-way corner of the country, and there were no other dwellings close by. You could get in and out without being noticed. It had
been built a long while before by the Brandybucks, for the use of
guests, or members of the family that wished to escape from the
crowded life of Brandy Hall for a time. It was an old-fashioned
countriﬁed house, as much like a hobbit-hole as possible: it was long
and low, with no upper storey; and it had a roof of turf, round
windows, and a large round door.
As they walked up the green path from the gate no light was visible;
the windows were dark and shuttered. Frodo knocked on the door,
and Fatty Bolger opened it. A friendly light streamed out. They
slipped in quickly and shut themselves and the light inside. They
were in a wide hall with doors on either side; in front of them a
passage ran back down the middle of the house.
‘Well, what do you think of it?’ asked Merry coming up the passage.
‘We have done our best in a short time to make it look like home. After
all Fatty and I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.’
Frodo looked round. It did look like home. Many of his own
favourite things – or Bilbo’s things (they reminded him sharply of
him in their new setting) – were arranged as nearly as possible as
they had been at Bag End. It was a pleasant, comfortable, welcoming
place; and he found himself wishing that he was really coming here
to settle down in quiet retirement. It seemed unfair to have put his
friends to all this trouble; and he wondered again how he was going
to break the news to them that he must leave them so soon, indeed
at once. Yet that would have to be done that very night, before they
all went to bed.

A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED

101

‘It’s delightful!’ he said with an effort. ‘I hardly feel that I have
moved at all.’
The travellers hung up their cloaks, and piled their packs on the
ﬂoor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at
the far end. Firelight came out, and a puff of steam.
‘A bath!’ cried Pippin. ‘O blessed Meriadoc!’
‘Which order shall we go in?’ said Frodo. ‘Eldest ﬁrst, or quickest
ﬁrst? You’ll be last either way, Master Peregrin.’
‘Trust me to arrange things better than that!’ said Merry. ‘We
can’t begin life at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room
there are three tubs, and a copper full of boiling water. There are also
towels, mats and soap. Get inside, and be quick!’
Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the
passage, and busied themselves with the ﬁnal preparations for a late
supper. Snatches of competing songs came from the bathroom mixed
with the sound of splashing and wallowing. The voice of Pippin
was suddenly lifted up above the others in one of Bilbo’s favourite
bath-songs.
Sing hey! for the bath at close of day
that washes the weary mud away!
A loon is he that will not sing:
O! Water Hot is a noble thing!
O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain,
and the brook that leaps from hill to plain;
but better than rain or rippling streams
is Water Hot that smokes and steams.
O! Water cold we may pour at need
down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed;
but better is Beer, if drink we lack,
and Water Hot poured down the back.
O! Water is fair that leaps on high
in a fountain white beneath the sky;
but never did fountain sound so sweet
as splashing Hot Water with my feet!
There was a terriﬁc splash, and a shout of Whoa! from Frodo. It
appeared that a lot of Pippin’s bath had imitated a fountain and
leaped on high.

102

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Merry went to the door: ‘What about supper and beer in the
throat?’ he called. Frodo came out drying his hair.
‘There’s so much water in the air that I’m coming into the kitchen
to ﬁnish,’ he said.
‘Lawks!’ said Merry, looking in. The stone ﬂoor was swimming.
‘You ought to mop all that up before you get anything to eat, Peregrin,’
he said. ‘Hurry up, or we shan’t wait for you.’
They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the ﬁre. ‘I suppose
you three won’t want mushrooms again?’ said Fredegar without much
hope.
‘Yes we shall!’ cried Pippin.
‘They’re mine!’ said Frodo. ‘Given to me by Mrs. Maggot, a queen
among farmers’ wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I’ll serve
them.’
Hobbits have a passion for mushrooms, surpassing even the
greediest likings of Big People. A fact which partly explains young
Frodo’s long expeditions to the renowned ﬁelds of the Marish, and
the wrath of the injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty
for all, even according to hobbit standards. There were also many
other things to follow, and when they had ﬁnished even Fatty Bolger
heaved a sigh of content. They pushed back the table, and drew
chairs round the ﬁre.
‘We’ll clear up later,’ said Merry. ‘Now tell me all about it! I
guess that you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair
without me. I want a full account; and most of all I want to know
what was the matter with old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like
that. He sounded almost as if he was scared, if that is possible.’
‘We have all been scared,’ said Pippin after a pause, in which
Frodo stared at the ﬁre and did not speak. ‘You would have been,
too, if you had been chased for two days by Black Riders.’
‘And what are they?’
‘Black ﬁgures riding on black horses,’ answered Pippin. ‘If Frodo
won’t talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.’ He then
gave a full account of their journey from the time when they left
Hobbiton. Sam gave various supporting nods and exclamations.
Frodo remained silent.
‘I should think you were making it all up,’ said Merry, ‘if I had
not seen that black shape on the landing-stage – and heard the queer
sound in Maggot’s voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?’
‘Cousin Frodo has been very close,’ said Pippin. ‘But the time has
come for him to open out. So far we have been given nothing more
to go on than Farmer Maggot’s guess that it has something to do
with old Bilbo’s treasure.’

A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED

103

‘That was only a guess,’ said Frodo hastily. ‘Maggot does not know
anything.’
‘Old Maggot is a shrewd fellow,’ said Merry. ‘A lot goes on behind
his round face that does not come out in his talk. I’ve heard that he
used to go into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation
of knowing a good many strange things. But you can at least tell us,
Frodo, whether you think his guess good or bad.’
‘I think,’ answered Frodo slowly, ‘that it was a good guess, as far
as it goes. There is a connexion with Bilbo’s old adventures, and the
Riders are looking, or perhaps one ought to say searching, for him or
for me. I also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and
that I am not safe here or anywhere else.’ He looked round at the
windows and walls, as if he was afraid they would suddenly give way.
The others looked at him in silence, and exchanged meaning glances
among themselves.
‘It’s coming out in a minute,’ whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry
nodded.
‘Well!’ said Frodo at last, sitting up and straightening his back, as
if he had made a decision. ‘I can’t keep it dark any longer. I have
got something to tell you all. But I don’t know quite how to begin.’
‘I think I could help you,’ said Merry quietly, ‘by telling you some
of it myself.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Frodo, looking at him anxiously.
‘Just this, my dear old Frodo: you are miserable, because you don’t
know how to say good-bye. You meant to leave the Shire, of course.
But danger has come on you sooner than you expected, and now
you are making up your mind to go at once. And you don’t want to.
We are very sorry for you.’
Frodo opened his mouth and shut it again. His look of surprise
was so comical that they laughed. ‘Dear old Frodo!’ said Pippin. ‘Did
you really think you had thrown dust in all our eyes? You have not
been nearly careful or clever enough for that! You have obviously
been planning to go and saying farewell to all your haunts all this
year since April. We have constantly heard you muttering: ‘‘Shall I
ever look down into that valley again, I wonder’’, and things like
that. And pretending that you had come to the end of your money,
and actually selling your beloved Bag End to those SackvilleBagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.’
‘Good heavens!’ said Frodo. ‘I thought I had been both careful
and clever. I don’t know what Gandalf would say. Is all the Shire
discussing my departure then?’
‘Oh no!’ said Merry. ‘Don’t worry about that! The secret won’t
keep for long, of course; but at present it is, I think, only known to
us conspirators. After all, you must remember that we know you well,

104

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and are often with you. We can usually guess what you are thinking.
I knew Bilbo, too. To tell you the truth, I have been watching you
rather closely ever since he left. I thought you would go after him
sooner or later; indeed I expected you to go sooner, and lately we
have been very anxious. We have been terriﬁed that you might give
us the slip, and go off suddenly, all on your own like he did. Ever
since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and done a good deal
of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape so
easily!’
‘But I must go,’ said Frodo. ‘It cannot be helped, dear friends. It
is wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since
you have guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!’
‘You do not understand!’ said Pippin. ‘You must go – and therefore we must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an
excellent fellow, and would jump down a dragon’s throat to save you,
if he did not trip over his own feet; but you will need more than one
companion in your dangerous adventure.’
‘My dear and most beloved hobbits!’ said Frodo deeply moved. ‘But
I could not allow it. I decided that long ago, too. You speak of danger,
but you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt, no there-andback journey. I am ﬂying from deadly peril into deadly peril.’
‘Of course we understand,’ said Merry ﬁrmly. ‘That is why we
have decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing-matter; but
we are going to do our best to help you against the Enemy.’
‘The Ring!’ said Frodo, now completely amazed.
‘Yes, the Ring,’ said Merry. ‘My dear old hobbit, you don’t allow
for the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence
of the Ring for years – before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he
obviously regarded it as secret, I kept the knowledge in my head,
until we formed our conspiracy. I did not know Bilbo, of course, as
well as I know you; I was too young, and he was also more careful
– but he was not careful enough. If you want to know how I ﬁrst
found out, I will tell you.’
‘Go on!’ said Frodo faintly.
‘It was the Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall, as you might
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking
along the road, when I saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance
the S.-B.s appeared, coming towards us. Bilbo slowed down, and
then hey presto! he vanished. I was so startled that I hardly had the
wits to hide myself in a more ordinary fashion; but I got through the
hedge and walked along the ﬁeld inside. I was peeping through into
the road, after the S.-B.s had passed, and was looking straight at
Bilbo when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of gold as he
put something back in his trouser-pocket.

A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED

105

‘After that I kept my eyes open. In fact, I confess that I spied. But
you must admit that it was very intriguing, and I was only in my
teens. I must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that
has ever seen the old fellow’s secret book.’
‘You have read his book!’ cried Frodo. ‘Good heavens above! Is
nothing safe?’
‘Not too safe, I should say,’ said Merry. ‘But I have only had one
rapid glance, and that was difﬁcult to get. He never left the book
about. I wonder what became of it. I should like another look. Have
you got it, Frodo?’
‘No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.’
‘Well, as I was saying,’ Merry proceeded, ‘I kept my knowledge
to myself, till this spring when things got serious. Then we formed
our conspiracy; and as we were serious, too, and meant business, we
have not been too scrupulous. You are not a very easy nut to crack,
and Gandalf is worse. But if you want to be introduced to our chief
investigator, I can produce him.’
‘Where is he?’ said Frodo, looking round, as if he expected a
masked and sinister ﬁgure to come out of a cupboard.
‘Step forward, Sam!’ said Merry; and Sam stood up with a face
scarlet up to the ears. ‘Here’s our collector of information! And he
collected a lot, I can tell you, before he was ﬁnally caught. After
which, I may say, he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and
dried up.’
‘Sam!’ cried Frodo, feeling that amazement could go no further,
and quite unable to decide whether he felt angry, amused, relieved,
or merely foolish.
‘Yes, sir!’ said Sam. ‘Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant no
wrong to you, Mr. Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf for that matter. He
has some sense, mind you; and when you said go alone, he said no!
take someone as you can trust.’
‘But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,’ said Frodo.
Sam looked at him unhappily. ‘It all depends on what you want,’
put in Merry. ‘You can trust us to stick to you through thick and
thin – to the bitter end. And you can trust us to keep any secret of
yours – closer than you keep it yourself. But you cannot trust us to
let you face trouble alone, and go off without a word. We are your
friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what Gandalf
has told you. We know a good deal about the Ring. We are horribly
afraid – but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.’
‘And after all, sir,’ added Sam, ‘you did ought to take the Elves’
advice. Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you
can’t deny it.’
‘I don’t deny it,’ said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now

106

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

grinning. ‘I don’t deny it, but I’ll never believe you are sleeping again,
whether you snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure.
‘You are a set of deceitful scoundrels!’ he said, turning to the
others. ‘But bless you!’ he laughed, getting up and waving his arms,
‘I give in. I will take Gildor’s advice. If the danger were not so dark,
I should dance for joy. Even so, I cannot help feeling happy; happier
than I have felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.’
‘Good! That’s settled. Three cheers for Captain Frodo and company!’ they shouted; and they danced round him. Merry and Pippin
began a song, which they had apparently got ready for the occasion.
It was made on the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo on
his adventure long ago, and went to the same tune:
Farewell we call to hearth and hall!
Though wind may blow and rain may fall,
We must away ere break of day
Far over wood and mountain tall.
To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell
In glades beneath the misty fell,
Through moor and waste we ride in haste,
And whither then we cannot tell.
With foes ahead, behind us dread,
Beneath the sky shall be our bed,
Until at last our toil be passed,
Our journey done, our errand sped.
We must away! We must away!
We ride before the break of day!
‘Very good!’ said Frodo. ‘But in that case there are a lot of things
to do before we go to bed – under a roof, for tonight at any rate.’
‘Oh! That was poetry!’ said Pippin. ‘Do you really mean to start
before the break of day?’
‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I fear those Black Riders, and
I am sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in a place
to which it is known I was going. Also Gildor advised me not to
wait. But I should very much like to see Gandalf. I could see that
even Gildor was disturbed when he heard that Gandalf had never
appeared. It really depends on two things. How soon could the Riders
get to Bucklebury? And how soon could we get off ? It will take a
good deal of preparation.’
‘The answer to the second question,’ said Merry, ‘is that we could

A CONSPIRACY UNMASKED

107

get off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are
ﬁve ponies in a stable across the ﬁelds; stores and tackle are all
packed, except for a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.’
‘It seems to have been a very efﬁcient conspiracy,’ said Frodo.
‘But what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day
for Gandalf ?’
‘That all depends on what you think the Riders would do, if they
found you here,’ answered Merry. ‘They could have reached here by
now, of course, if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where
the Hedge runs down to the river-bank, just this side of the Bridge.
The gate-guards would not let them through by night, though they
might break through. Even in the daylight they would try to keep
them out, I think, at any rate until they got a message through to
the Master of the Hall – for they would not like the look of the Riders,
and would certainly be frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland
cannot resist a determined attack for long. And it is possible that in
the morning even a Black Rider that rode up and asked for Mr.
Baggins would be let through. It is pretty generally known that you
are coming back to live at Crickhollow.’
Frodo sat for a while in thought. ‘I have made up my mind,’ he
said ﬁnally. ‘I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am
not going by road: it would be safer to wait here than that. If I go
through the North-gate my departure from Buckland will be known
at once, instead of being secret for several days at least, as it might be.
And what is more, the Bridge and the East Road near the borders will
certainly be watched, whether any Rider gets into Buckland or not. We
don’t know how many there are; but there are at least two, and possibly
more. The only thing to do is to go off in a quite unexpected direction.’
‘But that can only mean going into the Old Forest!’ said Fredegar
horriﬁed. ‘You can’t be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous
as Black Riders.’
‘Not quite,’ said Merry. ‘It sounds very desperate, but I believe
Frodo is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed
at once. With luck we might get a considerable start.’
‘But you won’t have any luck in the Old Forest,’ objected Fredegar.
‘No one ever has luck in there. You’ll get lost. People don’t go in there.’
‘Oh yes they do!’ said Merry. ‘The Brandybucks go in – occasionally when the ﬁt takes them. We have a private entrance. Frodo went
in once, long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight,
of course, when the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.’
‘Well, do as you think best!’ said Fredegar. ‘I am more afraid of
the Old Forest than of anything I know about: the stories about it
are a nightmare; but my vote hardly counts, as I am not going on

108

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the journey. Still, I am very glad someone is stopping behind, who
can tell Gandalf what you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure
he will before long.’
Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave
the Shire, nor to see what lay outside it. His family came from the
Eastfarthing, from Budgeford in Bridgeﬁelds in fact, but he had never
been over the Brandywine Bridge. His task, according to the original
plans of the conspirators, was to stay behind and deal with inquisitive
folk, and to keep up as long as possible the pretence that Mr. Baggins
was still living at Crickhollow. He had even brought along some old
clothes of Frodo’s to help him in playing the part. They little thought
how dangerous that part might prove.
‘Excellent!’ said Frodo, when he understood the plan. ‘We could
not have left any message behind for Gandalf otherwise. I don’t know
whether these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not
have dared to risk a written message, in case they got in and searched
the house. But if Fatty is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure
of Gandalf knowing the way we have gone, that decides me. I am
going into the Old Forest ﬁrst thing tomorrow.’
‘Well, that’s that,’ said Pippin. ‘On the whole I would rather have
our job than Fatty’s – waiting here till Black Riders come.’
‘You wait till you are well inside the Forest,’ said Fredegar. ‘You’ll
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.’
‘It’s no good arguing about it any more,’ said Merry. ‘We have
still got to tidy up and put the ﬁnishing touches to the packing, before
we get to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.’
When at last he had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for some
time. His legs ached. He was glad that he was riding in the morning.
Eventually he fell into a vague dream, in which he seemed to be
looking out of a high window over a dark sea of tangled trees. Down
below among the roots there was the sound of creatures crawling
and snufﬂing. He felt sure they would smell him out sooner or later.
Then he heard a noise in the distance. At ﬁrst he thought it was
a great wind coming over the leaves of the forest. Then he knew that
it was not leaves, but the sound of the Sea far-off; a sound he had
never heard in waking life, though it had often troubled his dreams.
Suddenly he found he was out in the open. There were no trees after
all. He was on a dark heath, and there was a strange salt smell in the
air. Looking up he saw before him a tall white tower, standing alone
on a high ridge. A great desire came over him to climb the tower
and see the Sea. He started to struggle up the ridge towards the
tower: but suddenly a light came in the sky, and there was a noise
of thunder.

Chapter 6
THE OLD FOREST
Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in the room. Merry was standing there with a candle in one hand, and banging on the door with the
other. ‘All right! What is it?’ said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered.
‘What is it!’ cried Merry. ‘It is time to get up. It is half past four
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready.
Even Pippin is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch
the one that is to be the baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty!
At least he must get up and see us off.’
Soon after six o’clock the ﬁve hobbits were ready to start. Fatty
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry
went in front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path
that went through a spinney behind the house, and then cut across
several ﬁelds. The leaves of trees were glistening, and every twig was
dripping; the grass was grey with cold dew. Everything was still, and
far-away noises seemed near and clear: fowls chattering in a yard,
someone closing a door of a distant house.
In their shed they found the ponies: sturdy little beasts of the kind
loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for a long day’s work. They
mounted, and soon they were riding off into the mist, which seemed
to open reluctantly before them and close forbiddingly behind them.
After riding for about an hour, slowly and without talking, they saw
the Hedge looming suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over with
silver cobwebs.
‘How are you going to get through this?’ asked Fredegar.
‘Follow me!’ said Merry, ‘and you will see.’ He turned to the left
along the Hedge, and soon they came to a point where it bent inwards,
running along the lip of a hollow. A cutting had been made, at some
distance from the Hedge, and went sloping gently down into the
ground. It had walls of brick at the sides, which rose steadily, until
suddenly they arched over and formed a tunnel that dived deep under
the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side.
Here Fatty Bolger halted. ‘Good-bye, Frodo!’ he said. ‘I wish you
were not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the day is out. But good luck to you – today and every
day!’
‘If there are no worse things ahead than the Old Forest, I shall be
lucky,’ said Frodo. ‘Tell Gandalf to hurry along the East Road: we
shall soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.’ ‘Good-bye!’

110

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

they cried, and rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar’s
sight into the tunnel.
It was dark and damp. At the far end it was closed by a gate of
thick-set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when
they had all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a
clang, and the lock clicked. The sound was ominous.
‘There!’ said Merry. ‘You have left the Shire, and are now outside,
and on the edge of the Old Forest.’
‘Are the stories about it true?’ asked Pippin.
‘I don’t know what stories you mean,’ Merry answered. ‘If you
mean the old bogey-stories Fatty’s nurses used to tell him, about
goblins and wolves and things of that sort, I should say no. At any
rate I don’t believe them. But the Forest is queer. Everything in it is
very much more alive, more aware of what is going on, so to speak,
than things are in the Shire. And the trees do not like strangers. They
watch you. They are usually content merely to watch you, as long as
daylight lasts, and don’t do much. Occasionally the most unfriendly
ones may drop a branch, or stick a root out, or grasp at you with a
long trailer. But at night things can be most alarming, or so I am
told. I have only once or twice been in here after dark, and then only
near the hedge. I thought all the trees were whispering to each other,
passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language; and the
branches swayed and groped without any wind. They do say the trees
do actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In
fact long ago they attacked the Hedge: they came and planted themselves right by it, and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut
down hundreds of trees, and made a great bonﬁre in the Forest, and
burned all the ground in a long strip east of the Hedge. After that
the trees gave up the attack, but they became very unfriendly. There
is still a wide bare space not far inside where the bonﬁre was made.’
‘Is it only the trees that are dangerous?’ asked Pippin.
‘There are various queer things living deep in the Forest, and on
the far side,’ said Merry, ‘or at least I have heard so; but I have never
seen any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever one comes
inside one ﬁnds open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from
time to time in a queer fashion. Not far from this tunnel there is, or
was for a long time, the beginning of quite a broad path leading to
the Bonﬁre Glade, and then on more or less in our direction, east
and a little north. That is the path I am going to try and ﬁnd.’
The hobbits now left the tunnel-gate and rode across the wide
hollow. On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the ﬂoor
of the Forest, a hundred yards and more beyond the Hedge; but it
vanished as soon as it brought them under the trees. Looking back they

THE OLD FOREST

111

could see the dark line of the Hedge through the stems of trees that
were already thick about them. Looking ahead they could see only
tree-trunks of innumerable sizes and shapes: straight or bent, twisted,
leaning, squat or slender, smooth or gnarled and branched; and all
the stems were green or grey with moss and slimy, shaggy growths.
Merry alone seemed fairly cheerful. ‘You had better lead on and
ﬁnd that path,’ Frodo said to him. ‘Don’t let us lose one another, or
forget which way the Hedge lies!’
They picked a way among the trees, and their ponies plodded
along, carefully avoiding the many writhing and interlacing roots.
There was no undergrowth. The ground was rising steadily, and as
they went forward it seemed that the trees became taller, darker, and
thicker. There was no sound, except an occasional drip of moisture
falling through the still leaves. For the moment there was no whispering or movement among the branches; but they all got an uncomfortable feeling that they were being watched with disapproval, deepening
to dislike and even enmity. The feeling steadily grew, until they found
themselves looking up quickly, or glancing back over their shoulders,
as if they expected a sudden blow.
There was not as yet any sign of a path, and the trees seemed
constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly felt that he could not
bear it any longer, and without warning let out a shout. ‘Oi! Oi!’ he
cried. ‘I am not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will
you!’
The others halted startled; but the cry fell as if mufﬂed by a heavy
curtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood seemed to
become more crowded and more watchful than before.
‘I should not shout, if I were you,’ said Merry. ‘It does more harm
than good.’
Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to ﬁnd a way through,
and if he had been right to make the others come into this abominable
wood. Merry was looking from side to side, and seemed already
uncertain which way to go. Pippin noticed it. ‘It has not taken you
long to lose us,’ he said. But at that moment Merry gave a whistle
of relief and pointed ahead.
‘Well, well!’ he said. ‘These trees do shift. There is the Bonﬁre
Glade in front of us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have
moved away!’
The light grew clearer as they went forward. Suddenly they came
out of the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There
was sky above them, blue and clear to their surprise, for down under
the Forest-roof they had not been able to see the rising morning and
the lifting of the mist. The sun was not, however, high enough yet

112

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

to shine down into the clearing, though its light was on the tree-tops.
The leaves were all thicker and greener about the edges of the glade,
enclosing it with an almost solid wall. No tree grew there, only rough
grass and many tall plants: stalky and faded hemlocks and woodparsley, ﬁre-weed seeding into ﬂuffy ashes, and rampant nettles and
thistles. A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and cheerful garden
after the close Forest.
The hobbits felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadening daylight in the sky. At the far side of the glade there was a
break in the wall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see
it running on into the wood, wide in places and open above, though
every now and again the trees drew in and overshadowed it with their
dark boughs. Up this path they rode. They were still climbing gently,
but they now went much quicker, and with better heart; for it seemed
to them that the Forest had relented, and was going to let them pass
unhindered after all.
But after a while the air began to get hot and stuffy. The trees
drew close again on either side, and they could no longer see far
ahead. Now stronger than ever they felt again the ill will of the wood
pressing on them. So silent was it that the fall of their ponies’ hoofs,
rustling on dead leaves and occasionally stumbling on hidden roots,
seemed to thud in their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage
them, but his voice sank to a murmur.
O! Wanderers in the shadowed land
despair not! For though dark they stand,
all woods there be must end at last,
and see the open sun go past:
the setting sun, the rising sun,
the day’s end, or the day begun.
For east or west all woods must fail . . .
Fail – even as he said the word his voice faded into silence. The
air seemed heavy and the making of words wearisome. Just behind
them a large branch fell from an old overhanging tree with a crash
into the path. The trees seemed to close in before them.
‘They do not like all that about ending and failing,’ said Merry.
‘I should not sing any more at present. Wait till we do get to the
edge, and then we’ll turn and give them a rousing chorus!’
He spoke cheerfully, and if he felt any great anxiety, he did not
show it. The others did not answer. They were depressed. A heavy
weight was settling steadily on Frodo’s heart, and he regretted now
with every step forward that he had ever thought of challenging the
menace of the trees. He was, indeed, just about to stop and propose

THE OLD FOREST

113

going back (if that was still possible), when things took a new turn.
The path stopped climbing, and became for a while nearly level. The
dark trees drew aside, and ahead they could see the path going almost
straight forward. Before them, but some distance off, there stood a
green hill-top, treeless, rising like a bald head out of the encircling
wood. The path seemed to be making directly for it.
They now hurried forward again, delighted with the thought of
climbing out for a while above the roof of the Forest. The path
dipped, and then again began to climb upwards, leading them at last
to the foot of the steep hillside. There it left the trees and faded into
the turf. The wood stood all round the hill like thick hair that ended
sharply in a circle round a shaven crown.
The hobbits led their ponies up, winding round and round until
they reached the top. There they stood and gazed about them. The
air was gleaming and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any
great distance. Near at hand the mist was now almost gone; though
here and there it lay in hollows of the wood, and to the south of
them, out of a deep fold cutting right across the Forest, the fog still
rose like steam or wisps of white smoke.
‘That,’ said Merry, pointing with his hand, ‘that is the line of the
Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and ﬂows south-west
through the midst of the Forest to join the Brandywine below
Haysend. We don’t want to go that way! The Withywindle valley is
said to be the queerest part of the whole wood – the centre from
which all the queerness comes, as it were.’
The others looked in the direction that Merry pointed out, but
they could see little but mists over the damp and deep-cut valley;
and beyond it the southern half of the Forest faded from view.
The sun on the hill-top was now getting hot. It must have been
about eleven o’clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from
seeing much in other directions. In the west they could not make out
either the line of the Hedge or the valley of the Brandywine beyond
it. Northward, where they looked most hopefully, they could see
nothing that might be the line of the great East Road, for which they
were making. They were on an island in a sea of trees, and the horizon
was veiled.
On the south-eastern side the ground fell very steeply, as if the
slopes of the hill were continued far down under the trees, like islandshores that really are the sides of a mountain rising out of deep waters.
They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below
them, while they ate their mid-day meal. As the sun rose and passed
noon they glimpsed far off in the east the grey-green lines of the
Downs that lay beyond the Old Forest on that side. That cheered

114

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

them greatly; for it was good to see a sight of anything beyond the
wood’s borders, though they did not mean to go that way, if they
could help it: the Barrow-downs had as sinister a reputation in hobbitlegend as the Forest itself.
At length they made up their minds to go on again. The path that
had brought them to the hill reappeared on the northward side; but
they had not followed it far before they became aware that it was
bending steadily to the right. Soon it began to descend rapidly and
they guessed that it must actually be heading towards the Withywindle valley: not at all the direction they wished to take. After some
discussion they decided to leave this misleading path and strike northward; for although they had not been able to see it from the hill-top,
the Road must lie that way, and it could not be many miles off. Also
northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed to be drier
and more open, climbing up to slopes where the trees were thinner,
and pines and ﬁrs replaced the oaks and ashes and other strange and
nameless trees of the denser wood.
At ﬁrst their choice seemed to be good: they got along at a fair
speed, though whenever they got a glimpse of the sun in an open
glade they seemed unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But after
a time the trees began to close in again, just where they had appeared
from a distance to be thinner and less tangled. Then deep folds
in the ground were discovered unexpectedly, like the ruts of great
giant-wheels or wide moats and sunken roads long disused and
choked with brambles. These lay usually right across their line of
march, and could only be crossed by scrambling down and out again,
which was troublesome and difﬁcult with their ponies. Each time
they climbed down they found the hollow ﬁlled with thick bushes
and matted undergrowth, which somehow would not yield to the
left, but only gave way when they turned to the right; and they had
to go some distance along the bottom before they could ﬁnd a way
up the further bank. Each time they clambered out, the trees seemed
deeper and darker; and always to the left and upwards it was most
difﬁcult to ﬁnd a way, and they were forced to the right and
downwards.
After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction,
though they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They were being headed off, and were simply following
a course chosen for them – eastwards and southwards, into the heart
of the Forest and not out of it.
The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and
stumbled into a fold that was wider and deeper than any they had

THE OLD FOREST

115

yet met. It was so steep and overhung that it proved impossible to
climb out of it again, either forwards or backwards, without leaving
their ponies and their baggage behind. All they could do was to follow
the fold – downwards. The ground grew soft, and in places boggy;
springs appeared in the banks, and soon they found themselves following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy bed. Then
the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and
noisy, ﬂowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit
gully over-arched by trees high above them.
After stumbling along for some way along the stream, they came
quite suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the
sunlight before them. Coming to the opening they found that they
had made their way down through a cleft in a high steep bank, almost
a cliff. At its feet was a wide space of grass and reeds; and in the
distance could be glimpsed another bank almost as steep. A golden
afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy upon the hidden
land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a dark river of
brown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched over with willows,
blocked with fallen willows, and ﬂecked with thousands of faded
willow-leaves. The air was thick with them, ﬂuttering yellow from
the branches; for there was a warm and gentle breeze blowing softly
in the valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were
creaking.
‘Well, now I have at least some notion of where we are!’ said
Merry. ‘We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we
intended. This is the River Withywindle! I will go on and explore.’
He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the long
grasses. After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was
fairly solid ground between the cliff-foot and the river; in some places
ﬁrm turf went down to the water’s edge. ‘What’s more,’ he said,
‘there seems to be something like a footpath winding along on this
side of the river. If we turn left and follow it, we shall be bound to
come out on the east side of the Forest eventually.’
‘I dare say!’ said Pippin. ‘That is, if the track goes on so far, and
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there. Who made
the track, do you suppose, and why? I am sure it was not for our
beneﬁt. I am getting very suspicious of this Forest and everything in
it, and I begin to believe all the stories about it. And have you any
idea how far eastward we should have to go?’
‘No,’ said Merry, ‘I haven’t. I don’t know in the least how far
down the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often
enough to make a path along it. But there is no other way out that
I can see or think of.’
There being nothing else for it, they ﬁled out, and Merry led them

116

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

to the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and grasses
were lush and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found,
the path was easy to follow, as it turned and twisted, picking out the
sounder ground among the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed
over other rills, running down gullies into the Withywindle out of
the higher forest-lands, and at these points there were tree-trunks or
bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.
The hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of ﬂies of
all kinds buzzing round their ears, and the afternoon sun was burning
on their backs. At last they came suddenly into a thin shade; great
grey branches reached across the path. Each step forward became
more reluctant than the last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out
of the ground and up their legs, and falling softly out of the air upon
their heads and eyes.
Frodo felt his chin go down and his head nod. Just in front of him
Pippin fell forward on to his knees. Frodo halted. ‘It’s no good,’ he
heard Merry saying. ‘Can’t go another step without rest. Must have
nap. It’s cool under the willows. Less ﬂies!’
Frodo did not like the sound of this. ‘Come on!’ he cried. ‘We
can’t have a nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest ﬁrst.’ But the
others were too far gone to care. Beside them Sam stood yawning
and blinking stupidly.
Suddenly Frodo himself felt sleep overwhelming him. His head
swam. There now seemed hardly a sound in the air. The ﬂies had
stopped buzzing. Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing, a soft
ﬂuttering as of a song half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs
above. He lifted his heavy eyes and saw leaning over him a huge
willow-tree, old and hoary. Enormous it looked, its sprawling
branches going up like reaching arms with many long-ﬁngered hands,
its knotted and twisted trunk gaping in wide ﬁssures that creaked
faintly as the boughs moved. The leaves ﬂuttering against the bright
sky dazzled him, and he toppled over, lying where he fell upon the
grass.
Merry and Pippin dragged themselves forward and lay down with
their backs to the willow-trunk. Behind them the great cracks gaped
wide to receive them as the tree swayed and creaked. They looked
up at the grey and yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and
singing. They shut their eyes, and then it seemed that they could
almost hear words, cool words, saying something about water and
sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell and fell fast asleep at the
foot of the great grey willow.
Frodo lay for a while ﬁghting with the sleep that was overpowering
him; then with an effort he struggled to his feet again. He felt a

THE OLD FOREST

117

compelling desire for cool water. ‘Wait for me, Sam,’ he stammered.
‘Must bathe feet a minute.’
Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward side of the
tree, where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like gnarled
dragonets straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and
paddled his hot feet in the cool brown water; and there he too
suddenly fell asleep with his back against the tree.
Sam sat down and scratched his head, and yawned like a cavern.
He was worried. The afternoon was getting late, and he thought this
sudden sleepiness uncanny. ‘There’s more behind this than sun and
warm air,’ he muttered to himself. ‘I don’t like this great big tree. I
don’t trust it. Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won’t do at
all!’
He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had
become of the ponies. He found that two had wandered on a good
way along the path; and he had just caught them and brought them
back towards the others, when he heard two noises; one loud, and
the other soft but very clear. One was the splash of something heavy
falling into the water; the other was a noise like the snick of a lock
when a door quietly closes fast.
He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was in the water close to the
edge, and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him
down, but he was not struggling. Sam gripped him by the jacket, and
dragged him from under the root; and then with difﬁculty hauled
him on to the bank. Almost at once he woke, and coughed and
spluttered.
‘Do you know, Sam,’ he said at length, ‘the beastly tree threw me
in! I felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!’
‘You were dreaming I expect, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘You
shouldn’t sit in such a place, if you feel sleepy.’
‘What about the others?’ Frodo asked. ‘I wonder what sort of
dreams they are having.’
They went round to the other side of the tree, and then Sam
understood the click that he had heard. Pippin had vanished. The
crack by which he had laid himself had closed together, so that not
a chink could be seen. Merry was trapped: another crack had closed
about his waist; his legs lay outside, but the rest of him was inside a
dark opening, the edges of which gripped like a pair of pincers.
Frodo and Sam beat ﬁrst upon the tree-trunk where Pippin had
lain. They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack
that held poor Merry. It was quite useless.
‘What a foul thing to happen!’ cried Frodo wildly. ‘Why did we
ever come into this dreadful Forest? I wish we were all back at

118

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Crickhollow!’ He kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless of his
own feet. A hardly perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up
into the branches; the leaves rustled and whispered, but with a sound
now of faint and far-off laughter.
‘I suppose we haven’t got an axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?’
asked Sam.
‘I brought a little hatchet for chopping ﬁrewood,’ said Frodo. ‘That
wouldn’t be much use.’
‘Wait a minute!’ cried Sam, struck by an idea suggested by ﬁrewood. ‘We might do something with ﬁre!’
‘We might,’ said Frodo doubtfully. ‘We might succeed in roasting
Pippin alive inside.’
‘We might try to hurt or frighten this tree to begin with,’ said Sam
ﬁercely. ‘If it don’t let them go, I’ll have it down, if I have to gnaw
it.’ He ran to the ponies and before long came back with two tinderboxes and a hatchet.
Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits of bark; and
made a pile of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These they heaped
against the trunk on the far side of the tree from the prisoners. As
soon as Sam had struck a spark into the tinder, it kindled the dry
grass and a ﬂurry of ﬂame and smoke went up. The twigs crackled.
Little ﬁngers of ﬁre licked against the dry scored rind of the ancient
tree and scorched it. A tremor ran through the whole willow. The
leaves seemed to hiss above their heads with a sound of pain and
anger. A loud scream came from Merry, and from far inside the tree
they heard Pippin give a mufﬂed yell.
‘Put it out! Put it out!’ cried Merry. ‘He’ll squeeze me in two, if
you don’t. He says so!’
‘Who? What?’ shouted Frodo, rushing round to the other side of
the tree.
‘Put it out! Put it out!’ begged Merry. The branches of the willow
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and
spreading outwards to the branches of all the other trees round about,
as though they had dropped a stone into the quiet slumber of the
river-valley and set up ripples of anger that ran out over the whole
Forest. Sam kicked at the little ﬁre and stamped out the sparks. But
Frodo, without any clear idea of why he did so, or what he hoped
for, ran along the path crying help! help! help! It seemed to him that
he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill voice: it was blown
away from him by the willow-wind and drowned in a clamour of
leaves, as soon as the words left his mouth. He felt desperate: lost
and witless.
Suddenly he stopped. There was an answer, or so he thought; but
it seemed to come from behind him, away down the path further

THE OLD FOREST

119

back in the Forest. He turned round and listened, and soon there
could be no doubt: someone was singing a song; a deep glad voice
was singing carelessly and happily, but it was singing nonsense:
Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo!
Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow!
Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo!
Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam
now both stood still. Suddenly out of a long string of nonsense-words
(or so they seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into
this song:
Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My darling!
Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling.
Down along under Hill, shining in the sunlight,
Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight,
There my pretty lady is, River-woman’s daughter,
Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water.
Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing
Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing?
Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! and merry-o,
Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o!
Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away!
Tom’s in a hurry now. Evening will follow day.
Tom’s going home again water-lilies bringing.
Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?
Frodo and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed out. The
leaves hung silently again on stiff branches. There was another burst
of song, and then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path,
there appeared above the reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown
and a long blue feather stuck in the band. With another hop and a
bound there came into view a man, or so it seemed. At any rate he
was too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not quite tall enough for one
of the Big People, though he made noise enough for one, stumping
along with great yellow boots on his thick legs, and charging through
grass and rushes like a cow going down to drink. He had a blue coat
and a long brown beard; his eyes were blue and bright, and his face
was red as a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred wrinkles of
laughter. In his hands he carried on a large leaf as on a tray a small
pile of white water-lilies.
‘Help!’ cried Frodo and Sam running towards him with their hands
stretched out.

120

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Whoa! Whoa! steady there!’ cried the old man, holding up one
hand, and they stopped short, as if they had been struck stiff. ‘Now,
my little fellows, where be you a-going to, pufﬁng like a bellows?
What’s the matter here then? Do you know who I am? I’m Tom
Bombadil. Tell me what’s your trouble! Tom’s in a hurry now. Don’t
you crush my lilies!’
‘My friends are caught in the willow-tree,’ cried Frodo breathlessly.
‘Master Merry’s being squeezed in a crack!’ cried Sam.
‘What?’ shouted Tom Bombadil, leaping up in the air. ‘Old Man
Willow? Naught worse than that, eh? That can soon be mended. I
know the tune for him. Old grey Willow-man! I’ll freeze his marrow
cold, if he don’t behave himself. I’ll sing his roots off. I’ll sing a wind
up and blow leaf and branch away. Old Man Willow!’
Setting down his lilies carefully on the grass, he ran to the tree.
There he saw Merry’s feet still sticking out – the rest had already
been drawn further inside. Tom put his mouth to the crack and
began singing into it in a low voice. They could not catch the
words, but evidently Merry was aroused. His legs began to kick. Tom
sprang away, and breaking off a hanging branch smote the side of
the willow with it. ‘You let them out again, Old Man Willow!’ he
said. ‘What be you a-thinking of ? You should not be waking. Eat
earth! Dig deep! Drink water! Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!’ He
then seized Merry’s feet and drew him out of the suddenly widening
crack.
There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out
of it Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then with a loud snap
both cracks closed fast again. A shudder ran through the tree from
root to tip, and complete silence fell.
‘Thank you!’ said the hobbits, one after the other.
Tom Bombadil burst out laughing. ‘Well, my little fellows!’ said
he, stooping so that he peered into their faces. ‘You shall come home
with me! The table is all laden with yellow cream, honeycomb, and
white bread and butter. Goldberry is waiting. Time enough for questions around the supper table. You follow after me as quick as you
are able!’ With that he picked up his lilies, and then with a beckoning
wave of his hand went hopping and dancing along the path eastward,
still singing loudly and nonsensically.
Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed after
him as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon
disappeared in front of them, and the noise of his singing got fainter
and further away. Suddenly his voice came ﬂoating back to them in
a loud halloo!

THE OLD FOREST

121

Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle!
Tom’s going on ahead candles for to kindle.
Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping.
When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open,
Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.
Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow!
Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you.
Hey now! merry dol! We’ll be waiting for you!
After that the hobbits heard no more. Almost at once the sun
seemed to sink into the trees behind them. They thought of the
slanting light of evening glittering on the Brandywine River, and the
windows of Bucklebury beginning to gleam with hundreds of lights.
Great shadows fell across them; trunks and branches of trees hung
dark and threatening over the path. White mists began to rise and
curl on the surface of the river and stray about the roots of the trees
upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a shadowy
steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk.
It became difﬁcult to follow the path, and they were very tired.
Their legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the
bushes and reeds on either side of them; and if they looked up to
the pale sky, they caught sight of queer gnarled and knobbly faces
that gloomed dark against the twilight, and leered down at them from
the high bank and the edges of the wood. They began to feel that all
this country was unreal, and that they were stumbling through an
ominous dream that led to no awakening.
Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed
that the ground was gently rising. The water began to murmur. In
the darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the river
ﬂowed over a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and
the mists were left behind. They stepped out from the Forest, and
found a wide sweep of grass welling up before them. The river, now
small and swift, was leaping merrily down to meet them, glinting
here and there in the light of the stars, which were already shining
in the sky.
The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been
mown or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and
trim as a hedge. The path was now plain before them, well-tended
and bordered with stone. It wound up on to the top of a grassy knoll,
now grey under the pale starry night; and there, still high above them
on a further slope, they saw the twinkling lights of a house. Down
again the path went, and then up again, up a long smooth hillside
of turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow beam ﬂowed out
brightly from a door that was opened. There was Tom Bombadil’s

122

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

house before them, up, down, under hill. Behind it a steep shoulder
of the land lay grey and bare, and beyond that the dark shapes of
the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night.
They all hurried forward, hobbits and ponies. Already half their
weariness and all their fears had fallen from them. Hey! Come merry
dol! rolled out the song to greet them.
Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties!
Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties.
Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together!
Then another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like
the song of a glad water ﬂowing down into the night from a bright
morning in the hills, came falling like silver to meet them:
Now let the song begin! Let us sing together
Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather,
Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather,
Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather,
Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water:
Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter!
And with that song the hobbits stood upon the threshold, and a
golden light was all about them.

Chapter 7
IN THE HOUSE OF
TOM BOMBADIL
The four hobbits stepped over the wide stone threshold, and stood
still, blinking. They were in a long low room, ﬁlled with the light of
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark
polished wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly.
In a chair, at the far side of the room facing the outer door, sat a
woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders; her gown
was green, green as young reeds, shot with silver like beads of dew;
and her belt was of gold, shaped like a chain of ﬂag-lilies set with
the pale-blue eyes of forget-me-nots. About her feet in wide vessels
of green and brown earthenware, white water-lilies were ﬂoating, so
that she seemed to be enthroned in the midst of a pool.
‘Enter, good guests!’ she said, and as she spoke they knew that it
was her clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid
steps further into the room, and began to bow low, feeling strangely
surprised and awkward, like folk that, knocking at a cottage door to
beg for a drink of water, have been answered by a fair young elf-queen
clad in living ﬂowers. But before they could say anything, she sprang
lightly up and over the lily-bowls, and ran laughing towards them;
and as she ran her gown rustled softly like the wind in the ﬂowering
borders of a river.
‘Come dear folk!’ she said, taking Frodo by the hand. ‘Laugh and
be merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of the River.’ Then lightly she
passed them and closing the door she turned her back to it, with her
white arms spread out across it. ‘Let us shut out the night!’ she said.
‘For you are still afraid, perhaps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep
water, and untame things. Fear nothing! For tonight you are under
the roof of Tom Bombadil.’
The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of
them and smiled. ‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ said Frodo at last, feeling
his heart moved with a joy that he did not understand. He stood as
he had at times stood enchanted by fair elven-voices; but the spell
that was now laid upon him was different: less keen and lofty was
the delight, but deeper and nearer to mortal heart; marvellous and
yet not strange. ‘Fair lady Goldberry!’ he said again. ‘Now the joy
that was hidden in the songs we heard is made plain to me.

124

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water!
O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter!
O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after!
O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves’ laughter!’
Suddenly he stopped and stammered, overcome with surprise to hear
himself saying such things. But Goldberry laughed.
‘Welcome!’ she said. ‘I had not heard that folk of the Shire were
so sweet-tongued. But I see that you are an Elf-friend; the light in
your eyes and the ring in your voice tells it. This is a merry meeting!
Sit now, and wait for the Master of the house! He will not be long.
He is tending your tired beasts.’
The hobbits sat down gladly in low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberry busied herself about the table; and their eyes followed her, for
the slender grace of her movement ﬁlled them with quiet delight.
From somewhere behind the house came the sound of singing. Every
now and again they caught, among many a derry dol and a merry dol
and a ring a ding dillo the repeated words:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow;
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
‘Fair lady!’ said Frodo again after a while. ‘Tell me, if my asking
does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?’
‘He is,’ said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling.
Frodo looked at her questioningly. ‘He is, as you have seen him,’
she said in answer to his look. ‘He is the Master of wood, water, and
hill.’
‘Then all this strange land belongs to him?’
‘No indeed!’ she answered, and her smile faded. ‘That would
indeed be a burden,’ she added in a low voice, as if to herself. ‘The
trees and the grasses and all things growing or living in the land
belong each to themselves. Tom Bombadil is the Master. No one
has ever caught old Tom walking in the forest, wading in the water,
leaping on the hill-tops under light and shadow. He has no fear. Tom
Bombadil is master.’
A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat
and his thick brown hair was crowned with autumn leaves. He
laughed, and going to Goldberry, took her hand.
‘Here’s my pretty lady!’ he said, bowing to the hobbits. ‘Here’s
my Goldberry clothed all in silver-green with ﬂowers in her girdle!
Is the table laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white
bread, and butter; milk, cheese, and green herbs and ripe berries
gathered. Is that enough for us? Is the supper ready?’

IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL

125

‘It is,’ said Goldberry; ‘but the guests perhaps are not?’
Tom clapped his hands and cried: ‘Tom, Tom! your guests are
tired, and you had near forgotten! Come now, my merry friends, and
Tom will refresh you! You shall clean grimy hands, and wash your
weary faces; cast off your muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!’
He opened the door, and they followed him down a short passage
and round a sharp turn. They came to a low room with a sloping
roof (a penthouse, it seemed, built on to the north end of the house).
Its walls were of clean stone, but they were mostly covered with green
hanging mats and yellow curtains. The ﬂoor was ﬂagged, and strewn
with fresh green rushes. There were four deep mattresses, each piled
with white blankets, laid on the ﬂoor along one side. Against the
opposite wall was a long bench laden with wide earthenware basins,
and beside it stood brown ewers ﬁlled with water, some cold, some
steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set ready beside each
bed.
Before long, washed and refreshed, the hobbits were seated at the
table, two on each side, while at either end sat Goldberry and the
Master. It was a long and merry meal. Though the hobbits ate, as
only famished hobbits can eat, there was no lack. The drink in their
drinking-bowls seemed to be clear cold water, yet it went to their
hearts like wine and set free their voices. The guests became suddenly
aware that they were singing merrily, as if it was easier and more
natural than talking.
At last Tom and Goldberry rose and cleared the table swiftly. The
guests were commanded to sit quiet, and were set in chairs, each
with a footstool to his tired feet. There was a ﬁre in the wide hearth
before them, and it was burning with a sweet smell, as if it were built
of apple-wood. When everything was set in order, all the lights in
the room were put out, except one lamp and a pair of candles at
each end of the chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and stood
before them, holding a candle; and she wished them each a good
night and deep sleep.
‘Have peace now,’ she said, ‘until the morning! Heed no nightly
noises! For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight
and starlight and the wind off the hill-top. Good night!’ She passed
out of the room with a glimmer and a rustle. The sound of her
footsteps was like a stream falling gently away downhill over cool
stones in the quiet of night.
Tom sat on a while beside them in silence, while each of them
tried to muster the courage to ask one of the many questions he had
meant to ask at supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo
spoke:

126

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Did you hear me calling, Master, or was it just chance that brought
you at that moment?’
Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. ‘Eh, what?’
said he. ‘Did I hear you calling? Nay, I did not hear: I was busy
singing. Just chance brought me then, if chance you call it. It was
no plan of mine, though I was waiting for you. We heard news of
you, and learned that you were wandering. We guessed you’d come
ere long down to the water: all paths lead that way, down to Withywindle. Old grey Willow-man, he’s a mighty singer; and it’s hard for
little folk to escape his cunning mazes. But Tom had an errand there,
that he dared not hinder.’ Tom nodded as if sleep was taking him
again; but he went on in a soft singing voice:
I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies,
green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady,
the last ere the year’s end to keep them from the winter,
to ﬂower by her pretty feet till the snows are melted.
Each year at summer’s end I go to ﬁnd them for her,
in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle;
there they open ﬁrst in spring and there they linger latest.
By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter,
fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes.
Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating!
He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue:
And that proved well for you – for now I shall no longer
go down deep again along the forest-water,
not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passing
Old Man Willow’s house this side of spring-time,
not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter
dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water.
He fell silent again; but Frodo could not help asking one more
question: the one he most desired to have answered. ‘Tell us, Master,’
he said, ‘about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of
him before.’
‘No, don’t!’ said Merry and Pippin together, sitting suddenly
upright. ‘Not now! Not until the morning!’
‘That is right!’ said the old man. ‘Now is the time for resting.
Some things are ill to hear when the world’s in shadow. Sleep till the
morning-light, rest on the pillow! Heed no nightly noise! Fear no
grey willow!’ And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out,
and grasping a candle in either hand he led them out of the room.

IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL

127

Their mattresses and pillows were soft as down, and the blankets
were of white wool. They had hardly laid themselves on the deep
beds and drawn the light covers over them before they were asleep.
In the dead night, Frodo lay in a dream without light. Then he
saw the young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before
him a black wall of rock, pierced by a dark arch like a great gate. It
seemed to Frodo that he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that
the rock-wall was a circle of hills, and that within it was a plain, and
in the midst of the plain stood a pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower
but not made by hands. On its top stood the ﬁgure of a man. The
moon as it rose seemed to hang for a moment above his head and
glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the dark
plain below came the crying of fell voices, and the howling of many
wolves. Suddenly a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed
across the moon. The ﬁgure lifted his arms and a light ﬂashed from
the staff that he wielded. A mighty eagle swept down and bore him
away. The voices wailed and the wolves yammered. There was a
noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it was borne the sound of
hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East. ‘Black Riders!’
thought Frodo as he wakened, with the sound of the hoofs still echoing in his mind. He wondered if he would ever again have the courage
to leave the safety of these stone walls. He lay motionless, still listening; but all was now silent, and at last he turned and fell asleep again
or wandered into some other unremembered dream.
At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly; but a change came
over his dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or
thought he had waked, and yet still heard in the darkness the sound
that had disturbed his dream: tip-tap, squeak: the noise was like
branches fretting in the wind, twig-ﬁngers scraping wall and window:
creak, creak, creak. He wondered if there were willow-trees close to
the house; and then suddenly he had a dreadful feeling that he was
not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the willow and listening
to that horrible dry creaking voice laughing at him again. He sat up,
and felt the soft pillows yield to his hands, and he lay down again
relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his ears: ‘Fear
nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!’
Then he went to sleep again.
It was the sound of water that Merry heard falling into his quiet
sleep: water streaming down gently, and then spreading, spreading
irresistibly all round the house into a dark shoreless pool. It gurgled
under the walls, and was rising slowly but surely. ‘I shall be drowned!’
he thought. ‘It will ﬁnd its way in, and then I shall drown.’ He felt
that he was lying in a soft slimy bog, and springing up he set his foot

128

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

on the corner of a cold hard ﬂagstone. Then he remembered where
he was and lay down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing:
‘Nothing passes doors or windows save moonlight and starlight and
the wind off the hill-top.’ A little breath of sweet air moved the
curtain. He breathed deep and fell asleep again.
As far as he could remember, Sam slept through the night in deep
content, if logs are contented.
They woke up, all four at once, in the morning light. Tom was
moving about the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them
stir he clapped his hands, and cried: ‘Hey! Come merry dol! derry
dol! My hearties!’ He drew back the yellow curtains, and the hobbits
saw that these had covered the windows, at either end of the room,
one looking east and the other looking west.
They leapt up refreshed. Frodo ran to the eastern window, and
found himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had
half expected to see turf right up to the walls, turf all pocked with
hoof-prints. Actually his view was screened by a tall line of beans on
poles; but above and far beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed
up against the sunrise. It was a pale morning: in the East, behind
long clouds like lines of soiled wool stained red at the edges, lay
glimmering deeps of yellow. The sky spoke of rain to come; but the
light was broadening quickly, and the red ﬂowers on the beans began
to glow against the wet green leaves.
Pippin looked out of the western window, down into a pool of
mist. The Forest was hidden under a fog. It was like looking down
on to a sloping cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel
where the mist was broken into many plumes and billows: the valley
of the Withywindle. The stream ran down the hill on the left and
vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand was a ﬂower-garden
and a clipped hedge silver-netted, and beyond that grey shaven grass
pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen.
‘Good morning, merry friends!’ cried Tom, opening the eastern
window wide. A cool air ﬂowed in; it had a rainy smell. ‘Sun won’t
show her face much today, I’m thinking. I have been walking wide,
leaping on the hill-tops, since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and
weather, wet grass underfoot, wet sky above me. I wakened Goldberry
singing under window; but naught wakes hobbit-folk in the early
morning. In the night little folk wake up in the darkness, and sleep
after light has come! Ring a ding dillo! Wake now, my merry friends!
Forget the nightly noises! Ring a ding dillo del! derry del, my hearties!
If you come soon you’ll ﬁnd breakfast on the table. If you come late
you’ll get grass and rain-water!’
Needless to say – not that Tom’s threat sounded very serious –

IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL

129

the hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was
beginning to look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry were
there. Tom could be heard about the house, clattering in the kitchen,
and up and down the stairs, and singing here and there outside. The
room looked westward over the mist-clouded valley, and the window
was open. Water dripped down from the thatched eaves above. Before
they had ﬁnished breakfast the clouds had joined into an unbroken
roof, and a straight grey rain came softly and steadily down. Behind
its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled.
As they looked out of the window there came falling gently as if
it was ﬂowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear voice of Goldberry singing up above them. They could hear few words, but it
seemed plain to them that the song was a rain-song, as sweet as
showers on dry hills, that told the tale of a river from the spring in
the highlands to the Sea far below. The hobbits listened with delight;
and Frodo was glad in his heart, and blessed the kindly weather,
because it delayed them from departing. The thought of going had
been heavy upon him from the moment he awoke; but he guessed
now that they would not go further that day.
The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds
rolled up to spill their laden rain on the bare heads of the Downs.
Nothing could be seen all round the house but falling water. Frodo
stood near the open door and watched the white chalky path turn
into a little river of milk and go bubbling away down into the valley.
Tom Bombadil came trotting round the corner of the house, waving
his arms as if he was warding off the rain – and indeed when he
sprang over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his boots.
These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then he sat in the
largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round him.
‘This is Goldberry’s washing day,’ he said, ‘and her autumncleaning. Too wet for hobbit-folk – let them rest while they are able!
It’s a good day for long tales, for questions and for answers, so Tom
will start the talking.’
He then told them many remarkable stories, sometimes half as if
speaking to himself, sometimes looking at them suddenly with a
bright blue eye under his deep brows. Often his voice would turn to
song, and he would get out of his chair and dance about. He told
them tales of bees and ﬂowers, the ways of trees, and the strange
creatures of the Forest, about the evil things and good things, things
friendly and things unfriendly, cruel things and kind things, and
secrets hidden under brambles.
As they listened, they began to understand the lives of the Forest,
apart from themselves, indeed to feel themselves as the strangers

130

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

where all other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out
of his talk was Old Man Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to
content him, indeed more than enough, for it was not comfortable
lore. Tom’s words laid bare the hearts of trees and their thoughts,
which were often dark and strange, and ﬁlled with a hatred of things
that go free upon the earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, hacking, burning: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called the Old Forest without
reason, for it was indeed ancient, a survivor of vast forgotten woods;
and in it there lived yet, ageing no quicker than the hills, the fathers
of the fathers of trees, remembering times when they were lords. The
countless years had ﬁlled them with pride and rooted wisdom, and
with malice. But none were more dangerous than the Great Willow:
his heart was rotten, but his strength was green; and he was cunning,
and a master of winds, and his song and thought ran through the
woods on both sides of the river. His grey thirsty spirit drew power
out of the earth and spread like ﬁne root-threads in the ground, and
invisible twig-ﬁngers in the air, till it had under its dominion nearly
all the trees of the Forest from the Hedge to the Downs.
Suddenly Tom’s talk left the woods and went leaping up the young
stream, over bubbling waterfalls, over pebbles and worn rocks, and
among small ﬂowers in close grass and wet crannies, wandering at
last up on to the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the
green mounds, and the stone-rings upon the hills and in the hollows
among the hills. Sheep were bleating in ﬂocks. Green walls and white
walls rose. There were fortresses on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms fought together, and the young Sun shone like ﬁre on the red
metal of their new and greedy swords. There was victory and defeat;
and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and ﬂames went up into the
sky. Gold was piled on the biers of dead kings and queens; and
mounds covered them, and the stone doors were shut; and the grass
grew over all. Sheep walked for a while biting the grass, but soon the
hills were empty again. A shadow came out of dark places far away,
and the bones were stirred in the mounds. Barrow-wights walked in
the hollow places with a clink of rings on cold ﬁngers, and gold chains
in the wind. Stone rings grinned out of the ground like broken teeth
in the moonlight.
The hobbits shuddered. Even in the Shire the rumour of the
Barrow-wights of the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had been
heard. But it was not a tale that any hobbit liked to listen to, even
by a comfortable ﬁreside far away. These four now suddenly remembered what the joy of this house had driven from their minds:
the house of Tom Bombadil nestled under the very shoulder of those
dreaded hills. They lost the thread of his tale and shifted uneasily,
looking aside at one another.

IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL

131

When they caught his words again they found that he had now
wandered into strange regions beyond their memory and beyond their
waking thought, into times when the world was wider, and the seas
ﬂowed straight to the western Shore; and still on and back Tom went
singing out into ancient starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake.
Then suddenly he stopped, and they saw that he nodded as if he was
falling asleep. The hobbits sat still before him, enchanted; and it
seemed as if, under the spell of his words, the wind had gone, and
the clouds had dried up, and the day had been withdrawn, and
darkness had come from East and West, and all the sky was ﬁlled
with the light of white stars.
Whether the morning and evening of one day or of many days
had passed Frodo could not tell. He did not feel either hungry or
tired, only ﬁlled with wonder. The stars shone through the window
and the silence of the heavens seemed to be round him. He spoke
at last out of his wonder and a sudden fear of that silence:
‘Who are you, Master?’ he asked.
‘Eh, what?’ said Tom sitting up, and his eyes glinting in the gloom.
‘Don’t you know my name yet? That’s the only answer. Tell me,
who are you, alone, yourself and nameless? But you are young and
I am old. Eldest, that’s what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom
was here before the river and the trees; Tom remembers the ﬁrst
raindrop and the ﬁrst acorn. He made paths before the Big People,
and saw the little People arriving. He was here before the Kings and
the graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed westward,
Tom was here already, before the seas were bent. He knew the dark
under the stars when it was fearless – before the Dark Lord came
from Outside.’
A shadow seemed to pass by the window, and the hobbits glanced
hastily through the panes. When they turned again, Goldberry stood
in the door behind, framed in light. She held a candle, shielding its
ﬂame from the draught with her hand; and the light ﬂowed through
it, like sunlight through a white shell.
‘The rain has ended,’ she said; ‘and new waters are running downhill, under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!’
‘And let us have food and drink!’ cried Tom. ‘Long tales are thirsty.
And long listening’s hungry work, morning, noon, and evening!’ With
that he jumped out of his chair, and with a bound took a candle from
the chimney-shelf and lit it in the ﬂame that Goldberry held; then
he danced about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door
and disappeared.
Quickly he returned, bearing a large and laden tray. Then Tom
and Goldberry set the table; and the hobbits sat half in wonder and
half in laughter: so fair was the grace of Goldberry and so merry and

132

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

odd the caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they seemed to weave
a single dance, neither hindering the other, in and out of the room,
and round about the table; and with great speed food and vessels and
lights were set in order. The boards blazed with candles, white and
yellow. Tom bowed to his guests. ‘Supper is ready,’ said Goldberry;
and now the hobbits saw that she was clothed all in silver with a
white girdle, and her shoes were like ﬁshes’ mail. But Tom was all
in clean blue, blue as rain-washed forget-me-nots, and he had green
stockings.
It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the
spell of Tom’s words may have missed one meal or many, but when
the food was before them it seemed at least a week since they had
eaten. They did not sing or even speak much for a while, and paid
close attention to business. But after a time their hearts and spirits
rose high again, and their voices rang out in mirth and laughter.
After they had eaten, Goldberry sang many songs for them, songs
that began merrily in the hills and fell softly down into silence; and
in the silences they saw in their minds pools and waters wider than
any they had known, and looking into them they saw the sky below
them and the stars like jewels in the depths. Then once more she
wished them each good night and left them by the ﬁreside. But Tom
now seemed wide awake and plied them with questions.
He appeared already to know much about them and all their
families, and indeed to know much of all the history and doings of
the Shire down from days hardly remembered among the hobbits
themselves. It no longer surprised them; but he made no secret that
he owed his recent knowledge largely to Farmer Maggot, whom he
seemed to regard as a person of more importance than they had
imagined. ‘There’s earth under his old feet, and clay on his ﬁngers;
wisdom in his bones, and both his eyes are open,’ said Tom. It was
also clear that Tom had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that
in some fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the
ﬂight of Frodo.
Indeed so much did Tom know, and so cunning was his questioning, that Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his
own hopes and fears than he had told before even to Gandalf. Tom
wagged his head up and down, and there was a glint in his eyes when
he heard of the Riders.
‘Show me the precious Ring!’ he said suddenly in the midst of the
story: and Frodo, to his own astonishment, drew out the chain from
his pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom.
It seemed to grow larger as it lay for a moment on his big brownskinned hand. Then suddenly he put it to his eye and laughed. For

IN THE HOUSE OF TOM BOMBADIL

133

a second the hobbits had a vision, both comical and alarming, of his
bright blue eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the
Ring round the end of his little ﬁnger and held it up to the candlelight.
For a moment the hobbits noticed nothing strange about this. Then
they gasped. There was no sign of Tom disappearing!
Tom laughed again, and then he spun the Ring in the air – and
it vanished with a ﬂash. Frodo gave a cry – and Tom leaned forward
and handed it back to him with a smile.
Frodo looked at it closely, and rather suspiciously (like one who
has lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked the
same and weighed the same: for that Ring had always seemed to
Frodo to weigh strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted
him to make sure. He was perhaps a triﬂe annoyed with Tom for
seeming to make so light of what even Gandalf thought so perilously
important. He waited for an opportunity, when the talk was going
again, and Tom was telling an absurd story about badgers and their
queer ways – then he slipped the Ring on.
Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and
checked an exclamation. Frodo was delighted (in a way): it was his
own ring all right, for Merry was staring blankly at his chair, and
obviously could not see him. He got up and crept quietly away from
the ﬁreside towards the outer door.
‘Hey there!’ cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing
look in his shining eyes. ‘Hey! Come Frodo, there! Where be you
a-going? Old Tom Bombadil’s not as blind as that yet. Take off your
golden ring! Your hand’s more fair without it. Come back! Leave
your game and sit down beside me! We must talk a while more, and
think about the morning. Tom must teach the right road, and keep
your feet from wandering.’
Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he
came and sat down again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the
Sun would shine tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and
setting out would be hopeful. But they would do well to start early;
for weather in that country was a thing that even Tom could not be
sure of for long, and it would change sometimes quicker than he
could change his jacket. ‘I am no weather-master,’ said he; ‘nor is
aught that goes on two legs.’
By his advice they decided to make nearly due North from his
house, over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might
hope in that way to strike the East Road in a day’s journey, and avoid
the Barrows. He told them not to be afraid – but to mind their own
business.
‘Keep to the green grass. Don’t you go a-meddling with old stone
or cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk

134

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

with hearts that never falter!’ He said this more than once; and he
advised them to pass barrows by on the west-side, if they chanced
to stray near one. Then he taught them a rhyme to sing, if they
should by ill-luck fall into any danger or difﬁculty the next day.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By ﬁre, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
When they had sung this altogether after him, he clapped them
each on the shoulder with a laugh, and taking candles led them back
to their bedroom.

Chapter 8
FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS
That night they heard no noises. But either in his dreams or out of
them, he could not tell which, Frodo heard a sweet singing running
in his mind: a song that seemed to come like a pale light behind a
grey rain-curtain, and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass
and silver, until at last it was rolled back, and a far green country
opened before him under a swift sunrise.
The vision melted into waking; and there was Tom whistling like
a tree-full of birds; and the sun was already slanting down the hill
and through the open window. Outside everything was green and
pale gold.
After breakfast, which they again ate alone, they made ready to
say farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such a morning: cool, bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue.
The air came fresh from the North-west. Their quiet ponies were
almost frisky, snifﬁng and moving restlessly. Tom came out of the
house and waved his hat and danced upon the doorstep, bidding the
hobbits to get up and be off and go with good speed.
They rode off along a path that wound away from behind the
house, and went slanting up towards the north end of the hill-brow
under which it sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their
ponies up the last steep slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped.
‘Goldberry!’ he cried. ‘My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We
have never said farewell to her, nor seen her since the evening!’ He
was so distressed that he turned back; but at that moment a clear
call came rippling down. There on the hill-brow she stood beckoning
to them: her hair was ﬂying loose, and as it caught the sun it shone
and shimmered. A light like the glint of water on dewy grass ﬂashed
from under her feet as she danced.
They hastened up the last slope, and stood breathless beside her.
They bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round;
and they looked out from the hill-top over lands under the morning.
It was now as clear and far-seen as it had been veiled and misty when
they stood upon the knoll in the Forest, which could now be seen
rising pale and green out of the dark trees in the West. In that
direction the land rose in wooded ridges, green, yellow, russet under
the sun, beyond which lay hidden the valley of the Brandywine. To
the South, over the line of the Withywindle, there was a distant glint
like pale glass where the Brandywine River made a great loop in

136

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the lowlands and ﬂowed away out of the knowledge of the hobbits.
Northward beyond the dwindling downs the land ran away in ﬂats
and swellings of grey and green and pale earth-colours, until it faded
into a featureless and shadowy distance. Eastward the Barrow-downs
rose, ridge behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it was no more than a guess of blue and a remote
white glimmer blending with the hem of the sky, but it spoke to
them, out of memory and old tales, of the high and distant mountains.
They took a deep draught of the air, and felt that a skip and a
few stout strides would bear them wherever they wished. It seemed
fainthearted to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs
towards the Road, when they should be leaping, as lusty as Tom,
over the stepping stones of the hills straight towards the Mountains.
Goldberry spoke to them and recalled their eyes and thoughts.
‘Speed now, fair guests!’ she said. ‘And hold to your purpose! North
with the wind in the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make
haste while the Sun shines!’ And to Frodo she said: ‘Farewell, Elffriend, it was a merry meeting!’
But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted
his pony, and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle
slope behind the hill. Tom Bombadil’s house and the valley, and the
Forest were lost to view. The air grew warmer between the green
walls of hillside and hillside, and the scent of turf rose strong and
sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when they reached the bottom
of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small and slender like
a sunlit ﬂower against the sky: she was standing still watching them,
and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked she
gave a clear call, and lifting up her hand she turned and vanished
behind the hill.
Their way wound along the ﬂoor of the hollow, and round the
green feet of a steep hill into another deeper and broader valley, and
then over the shoulders of further hills, and down their long limbs,
and up their smooth sides again, up on to new hill-tops and down
into new valleys. There was no tree nor any visible water: it was a
country of grass and short springy turf, silent except for the whisper
of the air over the edges of the land, and high lonely cries of strange
birds. As they journeyed the sun mounted, and grew hot. Each time
they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown less. When
they caught a glimpse of the country westward the distant Forest
seemed to be smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again
from leaf and root and mould. A shadow now lay round the edge of
sight, a dark haze above which the upper sky was like a blue cap, hot
and heavy.

FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS

137

About mid-day they came to a hill whose top was wide and ﬂattened, like a shallow saucer with a green mounded rim. Inside there
was no air stirring, and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode
across and looked northwards. Then their hearts rose; for it seemed
plain that they had come further already than they had expected.
Certainly the distances had now all become hazy and deceptive, but
there could be no doubt that the Downs were coming to an end. A
long valley lay below them winding away northwards, until it came
to an opening between two steep shoulders. Beyond, there seemed
to be no more hills. Due north they faintly glimpsed a long dark line.
‘That is a line of trees,’ said Merry, ‘and that must mark the Road.
All along it for many leagues east of the Bridge there are trees growing.
Some say they were planted in the old days.’
‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘If we make as good going this afternoon
as we have done this morning, we shall have left the Downs before
the Sun sets and be jogging on in search of a camping place.’ But
even as he spoke he turned his glance eastwards, and he saw that on
that side the hills were higher and looked down upon them; and all
those hills were crowned with green mounds, and on some were
standing stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of green gums.
That view was somehow disquieting; so they turned from the sight
and went down into the hollow circle. In the midst of it there stood
a single stone, standing tall under the sun above, and at this hour
casting no shadow. It was shapeless and yet signiﬁcant: like a landmark, or a guarding ﬁnger, or more like a warning. But they were
now hungry, and the sun was still at the fearless noon; so they set
their backs against the east side of the stone. It was cool, as if the
sun had had no power to warm it; but at that time this seemed
pleasant. There they took food and drink, and made as good a noonmeal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for the food came
from ‘down under Hill’. Tom had provided them with plenty for the
comfort of the day. Their ponies unburdened strayed upon the grass.
Riding over the hills, and eating their ﬁll, the warm sun and the
scent of turf, lying a little too long, stretching out their legs and
looking at the sky above their noses: these things are, perhaps, enough
to explain what happened. However that may be: they woke suddenly
and uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant to take. The
standing stone was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched
eastward over them. The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming
through the mist just above the west wall of the hollow in which they
lay; north, south, and east, beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold
and white. The air was silent, heavy and chill. Their ponies were
standing crowded together with their heads down.

138

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm, and ran to the western
rim. They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as
they looked out in dismay towards the setting sun, it sank before
their eyes into a white sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the
East behind. The fog rolled up to the walls and rose above them,
and as it mounted it bent over their heads until it became a roof:
they were shut in a hall of mist whose central pillar was the standing
stone.
They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but they did not
quite lose heart. They still remembered the hopeful view they had
had of the line of the Road ahead, and they still knew in which
direction it lay. In any case, they now had so great a dislike for that
hollow place about the stone that no thought of remaining there was
in their minds. They packed up as quickly as their chilled ﬁngers
would work.
Soon they were leading their ponies in single ﬁle over the rim and
down the long northward slope of the hill, down into a foggy sea. As
they went down the mist became colder and damper, and their hair
hung lank and dripping on their foreheads. When they reached the
bottom it was so chill that they halted and got out cloaks and hoods,
which soon became bedewed with grey drops. Then, mounting their
ponies, they went slowly on again, feeling their way by the rise and
fall of the ground. They were steering, as well as they could guess,
for the gate-like opening at the far northward end of the long valley
which they had seen in the morning. Once they were through the
gap, they had only to keep on in anything like a straight line and they
were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go
beyond that, except for a vague hope that perhaps away beyond the
Downs there might be no fog.
Their going was very slow. To prevent their getting separated and
wandering in different directions they went in ﬁle, with Frodo leading.
Sam was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry.
The valley seemed to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a
hopeful sign. On either side ahead a darkness began to loom through
the mist; and he guessed that they were at last approaching the gap
in the hills, the north-gate of the Barrow-downs. If they could pass
that, they would be free.
‘Come on! Follow me!’ he called back over his shoulder, and he
hurried forward. But his hope soon changed to bewilderment and
alarm. The dark patches grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly
he saw, towering ominous before him and leaning slightly towards
one another like the pillars of a headless door, two huge standing
stones. He could not remember having seen any sign of these in the

FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS

139

valley, when he looked out from the hill in the morning. He had
passed between them almost before he was aware: and even as he
did so darkness seemed to fall round him. His pony reared and
snorted, and he fell off. When he looked back he found that he was
alone: the others had not followed him.
‘Sam!’ he called. ‘Pippin! Merry! Come along! Why don’t you
keep up?’
There was no answer. Fear took him, and he ran back past the
stones shouting wildly: ‘Sam! Sam! Merry! Pippin!’ The pony bolted
into the mist and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he
thought he heard a cry: ‘Hoy! Frodo! Hoy!’ It was away eastward,
on his left as he stood under the great stones, staring and straining
into the gloom. He plunged off in the direction of the call, and found
himself going steeply uphill.
As he struggled on he called again, and kept on calling more and
more frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it
seemed faint and far ahead and high above him. ‘Frodo! Hoy!’ came
the thin voices out of the mist: and then a cry that sounded like help,
help! often repeated, ending with a last help! that trailed off into a
long wail suddenly cut short. He stumbled forward with all the speed
he could towards the cries; but the light was now gone, and clinging
night had closed about him, so that it was impossible to be sure of
any direction. He seemed all the time to be climbing up and up.
Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him
when he at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was weary,
sweating and yet chilled. It was wholly dark.
‘Where are you?’ he cried out miserably.
There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware
that it was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning
to blow, an icy wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist
was ﬂowing past him now in shreds and tatters. His breath was
smoking, and the darkness was less near and thick. He looked up
and saw with surprise that faint stars were appearing overhead amid
the strands of hurrying cloud and fog. The wind began to hiss over
the grass.
He imagined suddenly that he caught a mufﬂed cry, and he made
towards it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and
thrust aside, and the starry sky was unveiled. A glance showed him
that he was now facing southwards and was on a round hill-top,
which he must have climbed from the north. Out of the east the
biting wind was blowing. To his right there loomed against the westward stars a dark black shape. A great barrow stood there.
‘Where are you?’ he cried again, both angry and afraid.

140

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Here!’ said a voice, deep and cold, that seemed to come out of
the ground. ‘I am waiting for you!’
‘No!’ said Frodo; but he did not run away. His knees gave, and
he fell on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound.
Trembling he looked up, in time to see a tall dark ﬁgure like a shadow
against the stars. It leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes,
very cold though lit with a pale light that seemed to come from some
remote distance. Then a grip stronger and colder than iron seized
him. The icy touch froze his bones, and he remembered no more.
When he came to himself again, for a moment he could recall
nothing except a sense of dread. Then suddenly he knew that he was
imprisoned, caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A Barrow-wight
had taken him, and he was probably already under the dreadful spells
of the Barrow-wights about which whispered tales spoke. He dared
not move, but lay as he found himself: ﬂat on his back upon a cold
stone with his hands on his breast.
But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part of the
very darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking
about Bilbo Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together
in the lanes of the Shire and talking about roads and adventures.
There is a seed of courage hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the
heart of the fattest and most timid hobbit, waiting for some ﬁnal and
desperate danger to make it grow. Frodo was neither very fat nor
very timid; indeed, though he did not know it, Bilbo (and Gandalf )
had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought he had
come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought
hardened him. He found himself stiffening, as if for a ﬁnal spring;
he no longer felt limp like a helpless prey.
As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed
all at once that the darkness was slowly giving way: a pale greenish
light was growing round him. It did not at ﬁrst show him what kind
of a place he was in, for the light seemed to be coming out of himself,
and from the ﬂoor beside him, and had not yet reached the roof or
wall. He turned, and there in the cold glow he saw lying beside him
Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were on their backs, and their faces
looked deathly pale; and they were clad in white. About them lay
many treasures, of gold maybe, though in that light they looked cold
and unlovely. On their heads were circlets, gold chains were about
their waists, and on their ﬁngers were many rings. Swords lay by
their sides, and shields were at their feet. But across their three necks
lay one long naked sword.
*
*
*

FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS

141

Suddenly a song began: a cold murmur, rising and falling. The
voice seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in
the air and thin, sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out
of the formless stream of sad but horrible sounds, strings of words
would now and again shape themselves: grim, hard, cold words,
heartless and miserable. The night was railing against the morning
of which it was bereaved, and the cold was cursing the warmth for
which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while
the song became clearer, and with dread in his heart he perceived
that it had changed into an incantation:
Cold be hand and heart and bone,
and cold be sleep under stone:
never more to wake on stony bed,
never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead.
In the black wind the stars shall die,
and still on gold here let them lie,
till the dark lord lifts his hand
over dead sea and withered land.
He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising
himself on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that
they were in a kind of passage which behind them turned a corner.
Round the corner a long arm was groping, walking on its ﬁngers
towards Sam, who was lying nearest, and towards the hilt of the
sword that lay upon him.
At ﬁrst Frodo felt as if he had indeed been turned into stone by
the incantation. Then a wild thought of escape came to him. He
wondered if he put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight would
miss him, and he might ﬁnd some way out. He thought of himself
running free over the grass, grieving for Merry, and Sam, and Pippin,
but free and alive himself. Gandalf would admit that there had been
nothing else he could do.
But the courage that had been awakened in him was now too
strong: he could not leave his friends so easily. He wavered, groping
in his pocket, and then fought with himself again; and as he did so
the arm crept nearer. Suddenly resolve hardened in him, and he
seized a short sword that lay beside him, and kneeling he stooped
low over the bodies of his companions. With what strength he had
he hewed at the crawling arm near the wrist, and the hand broke off;
but at the same moment the sword splintered up to the hilt. There
was a shriek and the light vanished. In the dark there was a snarling
noise.
Frodo fell forward over Merry, and Merry’s face felt cold. All at

142

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

once back into his mind, from which it had disappeared with the ﬁrst
coming of the fog, came the memory of the house down under the
Hill, and of Tom singing. He remembered the rhyme that Tom had
taught them. In a small desperate voice he began: Ho! Tom Bombadil!
and with that name his voice seemed to grow strong: it had a full
and lively sound, and the dark chamber echoed as if to drum and
trumpet.
Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo!
By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,
By ﬁre, sun and moon, harken now and hear us!
Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us!
There was a sudden deep silence, in which Frodo could hear his
heart beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away,
as if it was coming down through the ground or through thick walls,
an answering voice singing:
Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,
Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.
None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master:
His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster.
There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and falling,
and suddenly light streamed in, real light, the plain light of day. A
low door-like opening appeared at the end of the chamber beyond
Frodo’s feet; and there was Tom’s head (hat, feather, and all) framed
against the light of the sun rising red behind him. The light fell upon
the ﬂoor, and upon the faces of the three hobbits lying beside Frodo.
They did not stir, but the sickly hue had left them. They looked now
as if they were only very deeply asleep.
Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber,
singing:
Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight!
Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing,
Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains!
Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty!
Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness,
Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended.
At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the
chamber fell in with a crash. Then there was a long trailing shriek,
fading away into an unguessable distance; and after that silence.

FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS

143

‘Come, friend Frodo!’ said Tom. ‘Let us get out on to clean grass!
You must help me bear them.’
Together they carried out Merry, Pippin, and Sam. As Frodo left
the barrow for the last time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still, like a wounded spider, in a heap of fallen earth. Tom went
back in again, and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he was bearing in his arms a great load of
treasure: things of gold, silver, copper, and bronze; many beads and
chains and jewelled ornaments. He climbed the green barrow and
laid them all on top in the sunshine.
There he stood, with his hat in his hand and the wind in his hair,
and looked down upon the three hobbits, that had been laid on their
backs upon the grass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right
hand he said in a clear and commanding voice:
Wake now my merry lads! Wake and hear me calling!
Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen;
Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken.
Night under Night is ﬂown, and the Gate is open!
To Frodo’s great joy the hobbits stirred, stretched their arms,
rubbed their eyes, and then suddenly sprang up. They looked about
in amazement, ﬁrst at Frodo, and then at Tom standing large as life
on the barrow-top above them; and then at themselves in their thin
white rags, crowned and belted with pale gold, and jingling with
trinkets.
‘What in the name of wonder?’ began Merry, feeling the golden
circlet that had slipped over one eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow
came over his face, and he closed his eyes. ‘Of course, I remember!’
he said. ‘The men of Carn Dûm came on us at night, and we were
worsted. Ah! the spear in my heart!’ He clutched at his breast. ‘No!
No!’ he said, opening his eyes. ‘What am I saying? I have been
dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?’
‘I thought that I was lost,’ said Frodo; ‘but I don’t want to speak
of it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!’
‘Dressed up like this, sir?’ said Sam. ‘Where are my clothes?’
He ﬂung his circlet, belt, and rings on the grass, and looked round
helplessly, as if he expected to ﬁnd his cloak, jacket, and breeches,
and other hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand.
‘You won’t ﬁnd your clothes again,’ said Tom, bounding down
from the mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the
sunlight. One would have thought that nothing dangerous or dreadful
had happened; and indeed the horror faded out of their hearts as
they looked at him, and saw the merry glint in his eyes.

144

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘What do you mean?’ asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled
and half amused. ‘Why not?’
But Tom shook his head, saying: ‘You’ve found yourselves again,
out of the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from
drowning. Be glad, my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heat
now heart and limb! Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass,
while Tom goes a-hunting!’
He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down
after him Frodo saw him running away southwards along the green
hollow between their hill and the next, still whistling and crying:
Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander?
Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder?
Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin,
White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin!
So he sang, running fast, tossing up his hat and catching it, until
he was hidden by a fold of the ground: but for some time his hey
now! hoy now! came ﬂoating back down the wind, which had shifted
round towards the south.
The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran about for
a while on the grass, as he told them. Then they lay basking in the
sun with the delight of those that have been wafted suddenly from
bitter winter to a friendly clime, or of people that, after being long
ill and bedridden, wake one day to ﬁnd that they are unexpectedly
well and the day is again full of promise.
By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and
hungry). He reappeared, hat ﬁrst, over the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an obedient line six ponies: their own ﬁve and one
more. The last was plainly old Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger,
fatter (and older) than their own ponies. Merry, to whom the others
belonged, had not, in fact, given them any such names, but they
answered to the new names that Tom had given them for the rest of
their lives. Tom called them one by one and they climbed over the
brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits.
‘Here are your ponies, now!’ he said. ‘They’ve more sense (in
some ways) than you wandering hobbits have – more sense in their
noses. For they sniff danger ahead which you walk right into; and if
they run to save themselves, then they run the right way. You must
forgive them all; for though their hearts are faithful, to face fear of
Barrow-wights is not what they were made for. See, here they come
again, bringing all their burdens!’
Merry, Sam, and Pippin now clothed themselves in spare garments

FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS

145

from their packs; and they soon felt too hot, for they were obliged
to put on some of the thicker and warmer things that they had brought
against the oncoming of winter.
‘Where does that other old animal, that Fatty Lumpkin, come
from?’ asked Frodo.
‘He’s mine,’ said Tom. ‘My four-legged friend; though I seldom
ride him, and he wanders often far, free upon the hillsides. When
your ponies stayed with me, they got to know my Lumpkin; and they
smelt him in the night, and quickly ran to meet him. I thought he’d
look for them and with his words of wisdom take all their fear away.
But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old Tom’s going to ride. Hey! he’s
coming with you, just to set you on the road; so he needs a pony.
For you cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding, when you’re on
your own legs trying to trot beside them.’
The hobbits were delighted to hear this, and thanked Tom many
times; but he laughed, and said that they were so good at losing
themselves that he would not feel happy till he had seen them safe
over the borders of his land. ‘I’ve got things to do,’ he said: ‘my
making and my singing, my talking and my walking, and my watching
of the country. Tom can’t be always near to open doors and willowcracks. Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting.’
It was still fairly early by the sun, something between nine and
ten, and the hobbits turned their minds to food. Their last meal had
been lunch beside the standing stone the day before. They breakfasted
now off the remainder of Tom’s provisions, meant for their supper,
with additions that Tom had brought with him. It was not a large
meal (considering hobbits and the circumstances), but they felt much
better for it. While they were eating Tom went up to the mound,
and looked through the treasures. Most of these he made into a pile
that glistered and sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie there ‘free
to all ﬁnders, birds, beasts, Elves or Men, and all kindly creatures’;
for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and
no Wight ever come back to it. He chose for himself from the pile a
brooch set with blue stones, many-shaded like ﬂax-ﬂowers or the
wings of blue butterﬂies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some
memory, shaking his head, and saying at last:
‘Here is a pretty toy for Tom and for his lady! Fair was she who
long ago wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and
we will not forget her!’
For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and
keen, of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in
red and gold. They gleamed as he drew them from their black sheaths,
wrought of some strange metal, light and strong, and set with many

146

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

ﬁery stones. Whether by some virtue in these sheaths or because of
the spell that lay on the mound, the blades seemed untouched by
time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun.
‘Old knives are long enough as swords for hobbit-people,’ he said.
‘Sharp blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking, east, south,
or far away into dark and danger.’ Then he told them that these
blades were forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they
were foes of the Dark Lord, but they were overcome by the evil king
of Carn Dûm in the Land of Angmar.
‘Few now remember them,’ Tom murmured, ‘yet still some go
wandering, sons of forgotten kings walking in loneliness, guarding
from evil things folk that are heedless.’
The hobbits did not understand his words, but as he spoke they
had a vision as it were of a great expanse of years behind them, like
a vast shadowy plain over which there strode shapes of Men, tall and
grim with bright swords, and last came one with a star on his brow.
Then the vision faded, and they were back in the sunlit world. It was
time to start again. They made ready, packing their bags and lading
their ponies. Their new weapons they hung on their leather belts
under their jackets, feeling them very awkward, and wondering if
they would be of any use. Fighting had not before occurred to any
of them as one of the adventures in which their ﬂight would land
them.
At last they set off. They led their ponies down the hill; and then
mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They looked back
and saw the top of the old mound on the hill, and from it the sunlight
on the gold went up like a yellow ﬂame. Then they turned a shoulder
of the Downs and it was hidden from view.
Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of
the great stones standing like a gate, and before long they came to
the northern gap and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away
before them. It was a merry journey with Tom Bombadil trotting
gaily beside them, or before them, on Fatty Lumpkin, who could
move much faster than his girth promised. Tom sang most of the
time, but it was chieﬂy nonsense, or else perhaps a strange language
unknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were
mainly those of wonder and delight.
They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was
further away than they had imagined. Even without a fog, their sleep
at mid-day would have prevented them from reaching it until after
nightfall on the day before. The dark line they had seen was not a
line of trees but a line of bushes growing on the edge of a deep dike
with a steep wall on the further side. Tom said that it had once been

FOG ON THE BARROW-DOWNS

147

the boundary of a kingdom, but a very long time ago. He seemed to
remember something sad about it, and would not say much.
They climbed down and out of the dike and through a gap in the
wall, and then Tom turned due north, for they had been bearing
somewhat to the west. The land was now open and fairly level, and
they quickened their pace, but the sun was already sinking low when
at last they saw a line of tall trees ahead, and they knew that they
had come back to the Road after many unexpected adventures. They
galloped their ponies over the last furlongs, and halted under the
long shadows of the trees. They were on the top of a sloping bank,
and the Road, now dim as evening drew on, wound away below
them. At this point it ran nearly from South-west to North-east, and
on their right it fell quickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted
and bore many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and
pot-holes full of water.
They rode down the bank and looked up and down. There was
nothing to be seen. ‘Well, here we are again at last!’ said Frodo. ‘I
suppose we haven’t lost more than two days by my short cut through
the Forest! But perhaps the delay will prove useful – it may have put
them off our trail.’
The others looked at him. The shadow of the fear of the Black
Riders came suddenly over them again. Ever since they had entered
the Forest they had thought chieﬂy of getting back to the Road; only
now when it lay beneath their feet did they remember the danger
which pursued them, and was more than likely to be lying in wait
for them upon the Road itself. They looked anxiously back towards
the setting sun, but the Road was brown and empty.
‘Do you think,’ asked Pippin hesitatingly, ‘do you think we may
be pursued, tonight?’
‘No, I hope not tonight,’ answered Tom Bombadil; ‘nor perhaps
the next day. But do not trust my guess; for I cannot tell for certain.
Out east my knowledge fails. Tom is not master of Riders from the
Black Land far beyond his country.’
All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They
felt that he would know how to deal with Black Riders, if anyone
did. They would soon now be going forward into lands wholly strange
to them, and beyond all but the most vague and distant legends of
the Shire, and in the gathering twilight they longed for home. A deep
loneliness and sense of loss was on them. They stood silent, reluctant
to make the ﬁnal parting, and only slowly became aware that Tom
was wishing them farewell, and telling them to have good heart and
to ride on till dark without halting.
‘Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over (after that
your own luck must go with you and guide you): four miles along

148

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the Road you’ll come upon a village, Bree under Bree-hill, with doors
looking westward. There you’ll ﬁnd an old inn that is called The
Prancing Pony. Barliman Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you
can stay the night, and afterwards the morning will speed you upon
your way. Be bold, but wary! Keep up your merry hearts, and ride
to meet your fortune!’
They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and drink once
more with them; but he laughed and refused, saying:
Tom’s country ends here: he will not pass the borders.
Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting!
Then he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin’s back, and
rode up over the bank and away singing into the dusk.
The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of
sight.
‘I am sorry to take leave of Master Bombadil,’ said Sam. ‘He’s a
caution and no mistake. I reckon we may go a good deal further and
see naught better, nor queerer. But I won’t deny I’ll be glad to see
this Prancing Pony he spoke of. I hope it’ll be like The Green Dragon
away back home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?’
‘There are hobbits in Bree,’ said Merry, ‘as well as Big Folk. I
daresay it will be homelike enough. The Pony is a good inn by all
accounts. My people ride out there now and again.’
‘It may be all we could wish,’ said Frodo; ‘but it is outside the
Shire all the same. Don’t make yourselves too much at home! Please
remember – all of you – that the name of Baggins must not be
mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given.’
They now mounted their ponies and rode off silently into the
evening. Darkness came down quickly, as they plodded slowly downhill and up again, until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance
ahead.
Before them rose Bree-hill barring the way, a dark mass against
misty stars; and under its western ﬂank nestled a large village.
Towards it they now hurried desiring only to ﬁnd a ﬁre, and a door
between them and the night.

Chapter 9
AT THE SIGN OF THE
PRANCING PONY
Bree was the chief village of the Bree-land, a small inhabited region,
like an island in the empty lands round about. Besides Bree itself,
there was Staddle on the other side of the hill, Combe in a deep
valley a little further eastward, and Archet on the edge of the Chetwood. Lying round Bree-hill and the villages was a small country of
ﬁelds and tamed woodland only a few miles broad.
The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad, and rather short,
cheerful and independent: they belonged to nobody but themselves;
but they were more friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves,
Elves, and other inhabitants of the world about them than was (or
is) usual with Big People. According to their own tales they were the
original inhabitants and were the descendants of the ﬁrst Men that
ever wandered into the West of the middle-world. Few had survived
the turmoils of the Elder Days; but when the Kings returned again
over the Great Sea they had found the Bree-men still there, and they
were still there now, when the memory of the old Kings had faded
into the grass.
In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or
within a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond
Bree there were mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them
Rangers, and knew nothing of their origin. They were taller and
darker than the Men of Bree and were believed to have strange powers
of sight and hearing, and to understand the languages of beasts and
birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards even as far as
the Misty Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen. When
they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange forgotten
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make
friends of them.
There were also many families of hobbits in the Bree-land; and
they claimed to be the oldest settlement of Hobbits in the world, one
that was founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and
the Shire colonized. They lived mostly in Staddle though there were
some in Bree itself, especially on the higher slopes of the hill, above
the houses of the Men. The Big Folk and the Little Folk (as they
called one another) were on friendly terms, minding their own affairs
in their own ways, but both rightly regarding themselves as necessary

150

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

parts of the Bree-folk. Nowhere else in the world was this peculiar
(but excellent) arrangement to be found.
The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did not themselves travel much;
and the affairs of the four villages were their chief concern. Occasionally the Hobbits of Bree went as far as Buckland, or the Eastfarthing;
but though their little land was not much further than a day’s riding
east of the Brandywine Bridge, the Hobbits of the Shire now seldom
visited it. An occasional Bucklander or adventurous Took would
come out to the Inn for a night or two, but even that was becoming
less and less usual. The Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and
to any others that lived beyond the borders, as Outsiders, and took
very little interest in them, considering them dull and uncouth. There
were probably many more Outsiders scattered about in the West of
the World in those days than the people of the Shire imagined. Some,
doubtless, were no better than tramps, ready to dig a hole in any
bank and stay only as long as it suited them. But in the Bree-land,
at any rate, the hobbits were decent and prosperous, and no more
rustic than most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten that there had been a time when there was much coming and
going between the Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the
Brandybucks by all accounts.
The village of Bree had some hundred stone houses of the Big
Folk, mostly above the Road, nestling on the hillside with windows
looking west. On that side, running in more than half a circle from
the hill and back to it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on
the inner side. Over this the Road crossed by a causeway; but where
it pierced the hedge it was barred by a great gate. There was another
gate in the southern corner where the Road ran out of the village.
The gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside them were small
lodges for the gatekeepers.
Down on the Road, where it swept to the right to go round the
foot of the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when
the trafﬁc on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an
old meeting of ways; another ancient road crossed the East Road just
outside the dike at the western end of the village, and in former days
Men and other folk of various sorts had travelled much on it. Strange
as News from Bree was still a saying in the Eastfarthing, descending
from those days, when news from North, South, and East could be
heard in the inn, and when the Shire-hobbits used to go more often
to hear it. But the Northern Lands had long been desolate, and
the North Road was now seldom used: it was grass-grown, and the
Bree-folk called it the Greenway.
The Inn of Bree was still there, however, and the innkeeper was

AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY

151

an important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle,
talkative, and inquisitive among the inhabitants, large and small, of
the four villages; and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and
for such travellers (mostly dwarves) as still journeyed on the East
Road, to and from the Mountains.
It was dark, and white stars were shining, when Frodo and his
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near
the village. They came to the West-gate and found it shut; but at the
door of the lodge beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up
and fetched a lantern and looked over the gate at them in surprise.
‘What do you want, and where do you come from?’ he asked
grufﬂy.
‘We are making for the inn here,’ answered Frodo. ‘We are journeying east and cannot go further tonight.’
‘Hobbits! Four hobbits! And what’s more, out of the Shire by their
talk,’ said the gatekeeper, softly as if speaking to himself. He stared
at them darkly for a moment, and then slowly opened the gate and
let them ride through.
‘We don’t often see Shire-folk riding on the Road at night,’ he
went on, as they halted a moment by his door. ‘You’ll pardon my
wondering what business takes you away east of Bree! What may
your names be, might I ask?’
‘Our names and our business are our own, and this does not seem
a good place to discuss them,’ said Frodo, not liking the look of the
man or the tone of his voice.
‘Your business is your own, no doubt,’ said the man; ‘but it’s my
business to ask questions after nightfall.’
‘We are hobbits from Buckland, and we have a fancy to travel and
to stay at the inn here,’ put in Merry. ‘I am Mr. Brandybuck. Is that
enough for you? The Bree-folk used to be fair-spoken to travellers,
or so I had heard.’
‘All right, all right!’ said the man. ‘I meant no offence. But you’ll
ﬁnd maybe that more folk than old Harry at the gate will be asking
you questions. There’s queer folk about. If you go on to The Pony,
you’ll ﬁnd you’re not the only guests.’
He wished them good night, and they said no more; but Frodo
could see in the lantern-light that the man was still eyeing them
curiously. He was glad to hear the gate clang to behind them, as they
rode forward. He wondered why the man was so suspicious, and
whether anyone had been asking for news of a party of hobbits. Could
it have been Gandalf ? He might have arrived, while they were delayed
in the Forest and the Downs. But there was something in the look
and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.

152

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then he went
back to his house. As soon as his back was turned, a dark ﬁgure
climbed quickly in over the gate and melted into the shadows of the
village street.
The hobbits rode on up a gentle slope, passing a few detached
houses, and drew up outside the inn. The houses looked large and
strange to them. Sam stared up at the inn with its three storeys and
many windows, and felt his heart sink. He had imagined himself
meeting giants taller than trees, and other creatures even more terrifying, some time or other in the course of his journey; but at the
moment he was ﬁnding his ﬁrst sight of Men and their tall houses
quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring day. He
pictured black horses standing all saddled in the shadows of the
inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows.
‘We surely aren’t going to stay here for the night, are we, sir?’ he
exclaimed. ‘If there are hobbit-folk in these parts, why don’t we look
for some that would be willing to take us in? It would be more
homelike.’
‘What’s wrong with the inn?’ said Frodo. ‘Tom Bombadil recommended it. I expect it’s homelike enough inside.’
Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar
eyes. It had a front on the Road, and two wings running back on
land partly cut out of the lower slopes of the hill, so that at the rear
the second-ﬂoor windows were level with the ground. There was a
wide arch leading to a courtyard between the two wings, and on the
left under the arch there was a large doorway reached by a few broad
steps. The door was open and light streamed out of it. Above the
arch there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a large signboard: a fat
white pony reared up on its hind legs. Over the door was painted in
white letters: the prancing pony by barliman butterbur. Many
of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.
As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing a
merry song inside, and many cheerful voices joined loudly in the
chorus. They listened to this encouraging sound for a moment and
then got off their ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of
laughter and clapping.
They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving them standing
in the yard they climbed up the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly
bumped into a short fat man with a bald head and a red face. He
had a white apron on, and was bustling out of one door and in
through another, carrying a tray laden with full mugs.
‘Can we——’ began Frodo.
‘Half a minute, if you please!’ shouted the man over his shoulder,

AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY

153

and vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a
moment he was out again, wiping his hands on his apron.
‘Good evening, little master!’ he said, bending down. ‘What may
you be wanting?’
‘Beds for four, and stabling for ﬁve ponies, if that can be managed.
Are you Mr. Butterbur?’
‘That’s right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your
service! You’re from the Shire, eh?’ he said, and then suddenly he
clapped his hand to his forehead, as if trying to remember something.
‘Hobbits!’ he cried. ‘Now what does that remind me of ? Might I ask
your names, sirs?’
‘Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,’ said Frodo; ‘and this is Sam
Gamgee. My name is Underhill.’
‘There now!’ said Mr. Butterbur, snapping his ﬁngers. ‘It’s gone
again! But it’ll come back, when I have time to think. I’m run off
my feet; but I’ll see what I can do for you. We don’t often get a party
out of the Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you
welcome. But there is such a crowd already in the house tonight as
there hasn’t been for long enough. It never rains but it pours, we say
in Bree.’
‘Hi! Nob!’ he shouted. ‘Where are you, you woolly-footed slowcoach? Nob!’
‘Coming, sir! Coming!’ A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out of a
door, and seeing the travellers, stopped short and stared at them with
great interest.
‘Where’s Bob?’ asked the landlord. ‘You don’t know? Well, ﬁnd
him! Double sharp! I haven’t got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell
Bob there’s ﬁve ponies that have to be stabled. He must ﬁnd room
somehow.’ Nob trotted off with a grin and a wink.
‘Well now, what was I going to say?’ said Mr. Butterbur, tapping
his forehead. ‘One thing drives out another, so to speak. I’m that
busy tonight, my head is going round. There’s a party that came up
the Greenway from down South last night – and that was strange
enough to begin with. Then there’s a travelling company of dwarves
going West come in this evening. And now there’s you. If you weren’t
hobbits, I doubt if we could house you. But we’ve got a room or two
in the north wing that were made special for hobbits, when this place
was built. On the ground ﬂoor as they usually prefer; round windows
and all as they like it. I hope you’ll be comfortable. You’ll be wanting
supper, I don’t doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!’
He led them a short way down a passage, and opened a door.
‘Here is a nice little parlour!’ he said. ‘I hope it will suit. Excuse me
now. I’m that busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It’s hard
work for two legs, but I don’t get thinner. I’ll look in again later. If

154

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

you want anything, ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he
don’t come, ring and shout!’
Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He
seemed capable of an endless stream of talk, however busy he might
be. They found themselves in a small and cosy room. There was a
bit of bright ﬁre burning on the hearth, and in front of it were some
low and comfortable chairs. There was a round table, already spread
with a white cloth, and on it was a large hand-bell. But Nob, the
hobbit servant, came bustling in long before they thought of ringing.
He brought candles and a tray full of plates.
‘Will you be wanting anything to drink, masters?’ he asked. ‘And
shall I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready?’
They were washed and in the middle of good deep mugs of beer
when Mr. Butterbur and Nob came in again. In a twinkling the table
was laid. There was hot soup, cold meats, a blackberry tart, new loaves,
slabs of butter, and half a ripe cheese: good plain food, as good as
the Shire could show, and homelike enough to dispel the last of Sam’s
misgivings (already much relieved by the excellence of the beer).
The landlord hovered round for a little, and then prepared to leave
them. ‘I don’t know whether you would care to join the company,
when you have supped,’ he said, standing at the door. ‘Perhaps you
would rather go to your beds. Still the company would be very pleased
to welcome you, if you had a mind. We don’t get Outsiders – travellers
from the Shire, I should say, begging your pardon – often; and we
like to hear a bit of news, or any story or song you may have in mind.
But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack anything!’
So refreshed and encouraged did they feel at the end of their
supper (about three quarters of an hour’s steady going, not hindered
by unnecessary talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join
the company. Merry said it would be too stuffy. ‘I shall sit here
quietly by the ﬁre for a bit, and perhaps go out later for a sniff of
the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and don’t forget that you are supposed
to be escaping in secret, and are still on the high-road and not very
far from the Shire!’
‘All right!’ said Pippin. ‘Mind yourself ! Don’t get lost, and don’t
forget that it is safer indoors!’
The company was in the big common-room of the inn. The gathering was large and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got
used to the light. This came chieﬂy from a blazing log-ﬁre, for the
three lamps hanging from the beams were dim, and half veiled in
smoke. Barliman Butterbur was standing near the ﬁre, talking to a
couple of dwarves and one or two strange-looking men. On the
benches were various folk: men of Bree, a collection of local hobbits

AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY

155

(sitting chattering together), a few more dwarves, and other vague
ﬁgures difﬁcult to make out away in the shadows and corners.
As soon as the Shire-hobbits entered, there was a chorus of welcome from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that had
come up the Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to the Bree-folk, so quickly that, though they
caught many names, they were seldom sure who the names belonged
to. The Men of Bree seemed all to have rather botanical (and to the
Shire-folk rather odd) names, like Rushlight, Goatleaf, Heathertoes,
Appledore, Thistlewool and Ferny (not to mention Butterbur). Some
of the hobbits had similar names. The Mugworts, for instance,
seemed numerous. But most of them had natural names, such as
Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes, Sandheaver, and Tunnelly, many of
which were used in the Shire. There were several Underhills from
Staddle, and as they could not imagine sharing a name without being
related, they took Frodo to their hearts as a long-lost cousin.
The Bree-hobbits were, in fact, friendly and inquisitive, and Frodo
soon found that some explanation of what he was doing would have
to be given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which there was much wagging of heads, although neither of
these words were much used in the Bree-dialect). He said he was
thinking of writing a book (at which there was silent astonishment),
and that he and his friends wanted to collect information about
hobbits living outside the Shire, especially in the eastern lands.
At this a chorus of voices broke out. If Frodo had really wanted
to write a book, and had had many ears, he would have learned
enough for several chapters in a few minutes. And if that was not
enough, he was given a whole list of names, beginning with ‘Old
Barliman here’, to whom he could go for further information. But
after a time, as Frodo did not show any sign of writing a book on
the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about doings in the
Shire. Frodo did not prove very communicative, and he soon found
himself sitting alone in a corner, listening and looking around.
The Men and Dwarves were mostly talking of distant events and
telling news of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There
was trouble away in the South, and it seemed that the Men who had
come up the Greenway were on the move, looking for lands where
they could ﬁnd some peace. The Bree-folk were sympathetic, but
plainly not very ready to take a large number of strangers into their
little land. One of the travellers, a squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow,
was foretelling that more and more people would be coming north
in the near future. ‘If room isn’t found for them, they’ll ﬁnd it for
themselves. They’ve a right to live, same as other folk,’ he said loudly.
The local inhabitants did not look pleased at the prospect.

156

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The hobbits did not pay much attention to all this, as it did not
at the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big Folk could hardly beg
for lodgings in hobbit-holes. They were more interested in Sam and
Pippin, who were now feeling quite at home, and were chatting gaily
about events in the Shire. Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with
an account of the collapse of the roof of the Town Hole in Michel
Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor, and the fattest hobbit in the
Westfarthing, had been buried in chalk, and came out like a ﬂoured
dumpling. But there were several questions asked that made Frodo
a little uneasy. One of the Bree-landers, who seemed to have been
in the Shire several times, wanted to know where the Underhills lived
and who they were related to.
Suddenly Frodo noticed that a strange-looking weather-beaten
man, sitting in the shadows near the wall, was also listening intently
to the hobbit-talk. He had a tall tankard in front of him, and was
smoking a long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs were
stretched out before him, showing high boots of supple leather that
ﬁtted him well, but had seen much wear and were now caked with
mud. A travel-stained cloak of heavy dark-green cloth was drawn
close about him, and in spite of the heat of the room he wore a hood
that overshadowed his face; but the gleam of his eyes could be seen
as he watched the hobbits.
‘Who is that?’ Frodo asked, when he got a chance to whisper to
Mr. Butterbur. ‘I don’t think you introduced him?’
‘Him?’ said the landlord in an answering whisper, cocking an eye
without turning his head. ‘I don’t rightly know. He is one of the
wandering folk – Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but
what he can tell a rare tale when he has the mind. He disappears for
a month, or a year, and then he pops up again. He was in and out
pretty often last spring; but I haven’t seen him about lately. What
his right name is I’ve never heard: but he’s known round here as
Strider. Goes about at a great pace on his long shanks; though he
don’t tell nobody what cause he has to hurry. But there’s no accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and
the Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you should ask about
him.’ But at that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away by a demand
for more ale and his last remark remained unexplained.
Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he had
heard or guessed all that had been said. Presently, with a wave of his
hand and a nod, he invited Frodo to come over and sit by him. As
Frodo drew near he threw back his hood, showing a shaggy head of
dark hair ﬂecked with grey, and in a pale stern face a pair of keen
grey eyes.
‘I am called Strider,’ he said in a low voice. ‘I am very pleased

AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY

157

to meet you, Master – Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name
right.’
‘He did,’ said Frodo stifﬂy. He felt far from comfortable under
the stare of those keen eyes.
‘Well, Master Underhill,’ said Strider, ‘if I were you, I should
stop your young friends from talking too much. Drink, ﬁre, and
chance-meeting are pleasant enough, but, well – this isn’t the Shire.
There are queer folk about. Though I say it as shouldn’t, you may
think,’ he added with a wry smile, seeing Frodo’s glance. ‘And there
have been even stranger travellers through Bree lately,’ he went on,
watching Frodo’s face.
Frodo returned his gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no
further sign. His attention seemed suddenly to be ﬁxed on Pippin.
To his alarm Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took,
encouraged by his success with the fat Mayor of Michel Delving, was
now actually giving a comic account of Bilbo’s farewell party. He
was already giving an imitation of the Speech, and was drawing near
to the astonishing Disappearance.
Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most of the
local hobbits, no doubt: just a funny story about those funny people
away beyond the River; but some (old Butterbur, for instance) knew
a thing or two, and had probably heard rumours long ago about
Bilbo’s vanishing. It would bring the name of Baggins to their minds,
especially if there had been inquiries in Bree after that name.
Frodo ﬁdgeted, wondering what to do. Pippin was evidently much
enjoying the attention he was getting, and had become quite forgetful
of their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood
he might even mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous.
‘You had better do something quick!’ whispered Strider in his ear.
Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to talk. The
attention of Pippin’s audience was disturbed. Some of the hobbits
looked at Frodo and laughed and clapped, thinking that Mr.
Underhill had taken as much ale as was good for him.
Frodo suddenly felt very foolish, and found himself (as was his
habit when making a speech) ﬁngering the things in his pocket. He
felt the Ring on its chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came
over him to slip it on and vanish out of the silly situation. It seemed
to him, somehow, as if the suggestion came to him from outside,
from someone or something in the room. He resisted the temptation
ﬁrmly, and clasped the Ring in his hand, as if to keep a hold on it
and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief. At any rate it
gave him no inspiration. He spoke ‘a few suitable words’, as they
would have said in the Shire: We are all very much gratiﬁed by the
kindness of your reception, and I venture to hope that my brief visit will

158

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

help to renew the old ties of friendship between the Shire and Bree; and
then he hesitated and coughed.
Everyone in the room was now looking at him. ‘A song!’ shouted
one of the hobbits. ‘A song! A song!’ shouted all the others. ‘Come
on now, master, sing us something that we haven’t heard before!’
For a moment Frodo stood gaping. Then in desperation he began
a ridiculous song that Bilbo had been rather fond of (and indeed
rather proud of, for he had made up the words himself ). It was about
an inn; and that is probably why it came into Frodo’s mind just
then. Here it is in full. Only a few words of it are now, as a rule,
remembered.
There is an inn, a merry old inn
beneath an old grey hill,
And there they brew a beer so brown
That the Man in the Moon himself came down
one night to drink his ﬁll.
The ostler has a tipsy cat
that plays a ﬁve-stringed ﬁddle;
And up and down he runs his bow,
Now squeaking high, now purring low,
now sawing in the middle.
The landlord keeps a little dog
that is mighty fond of jokes;
When there’s good cheer among the guests,
He cocks an ear at all the jests
and laughs until he chokes.
They also keep a hornéd cow
as proud as any queen;
But music turns her head like ale,
And makes her wave her tufted tail
and dance upon the green.
And O! the rows of silver dishes
and the store of silver spoons!
For Sunday* there’s a special pair,
And these they polish up with care
on Saturday afternoons.
* See note 2, III, p.1111

AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY

The Man in the Moon was drinking deep,
and the cat began to wail;
A dish and a spoon on the table danced,
The cow in the garden madly pranced,
and the little dog chased his tail.
The Man in the Moon took another mug,
and then rolled beneath his chair;
And there he dozed and dreamed of ale,
Till in the sky the stars were pale,
and dawn was in the air.
Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat:
‘The white horses of the Moon,
They neigh and champ their silver bits;
But their master’s been and drowned his wits,
and the Sun’ll be rising soon!’
So the cat on his ﬁddle played hey-diddle-diddle,
a jig that would wake the dead:
He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune,
While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon:
‘It’s after three!’ he said.
They rolled the Man slowly up the hill
and bundled him into the Moon,
While his horses galloped up in rear,
And the cow came capering like a deer,
and a dish ran up with the spoon.
Now quicker the ﬁddle went deedle-dum-diddle;
the dog began to roar,
The cow and the horses stood on their heads;
The guests all bounded from their beds
and danced upon the ﬂoor.
With a ping and a pong the ﬁddle-strings broke!
the cow jumped over the Moon,
And the little dog laughed to see such fun,
And the Saturday dish went off at a run
with the silver Sunday spoon.

159

160

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The round Moon rolled behind the hill
as the Sun raised up her head.
She* hardly believed her ﬁery eyes;
For though it was day, to her surprise
they all went back to bed!
There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a good voice, and
the song tickled their fancy. ‘Where’s old Barley?’ they cried. ‘He
ought to hear this. Bob ought to learn his cat the ﬁddle, and then
we’d have a dance.’ They called for more ale, and began to shout:
‘Let’s have it again, master! Come on now! Once more!’
They made Frodo have another drink, and then begin his song
again, while many of them joined in; for the tune was well known,
and they were quick at picking up words. It was now Frodo’s turn
to feel pleased with himself. He capered about on the table; and
when he came a second time to the cow jumped over the Moon, he
leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for he came down, bang, into
a tray full of mugs, and slipped, and rolled off the table with a crash,
clatter, and bump! The audience all opened their mouths wide for
laughter, and stopped short in gaping silence; for the singer disappeared. He simply vanished, as if he had gone slap through the
ﬂoor without leaving a hole!
The local hobbits stared in amazement, and then sprang to their
feet and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from
Pippin and Sam, who found themselves left alone in a corner, and
eyed darkly and doubtfully from a distance. It was plain that many
people regarded them now as the companions of a travelling magician
of unknown powers and purpose. But there was one swarthy Breelander, who stood looking at them with a knowing and half-mocking
expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he
slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the
two had been whispering together a good deal during the evening.
Frodo felt a fool. Not knowing what else to do, he crawled away
under the tables to the dark corner by Strider, who sat unmoved,
giving no sign of his thoughts. Frodo leaned back against the wall
and took off the Ring. How it came to be on his ﬁnger he could not
tell. He could only suppose that he had been handling it in his pocket
while he sang, and that somehow it had slipped on when he stuck
out his hand with a jerk to save his fall. For a moment he wondered
if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it had tried to
reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt in
the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out.
* Elves (and Hobbits) always refer to the Sun as She.

AT THE SIGN OF THE PRANCING PONY

161

‘Well?’ said Strider, when he reappeared. ‘Why did you do that?
Worse than anything your friends could have said! You have put your
foot in it! Or should I say your ﬁnger?’
‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed.
‘Oh yes, you do,’ answered Strider; ‘but we had better wait until
the uproar has died down. Then, if you please, Mr. Baggins, I should
like a quiet word with you.’
‘What about?’ asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper
name.
‘A matter of some importance – to us both,’ answered Strider,
looking Frodo in the eye. ‘You may hear something to your
advantage.’
‘Very well,’ said Frodo, trying to appear unconcerned. ‘I’ll talk to
you later.’
Meanwhile an argument was going on by the ﬁreplace. Mr.
Butterbur had come trotting in, and he was now trying to listen to
several conﬂicting accounts of the event at the same time.
‘I saw him, Mr. Butterbur,’ said a hobbit; ‘or leastways I didn’t
see him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished into thin air, in
a manner of speaking.’
‘You don’t say, Mr. Mugwort!’ said the landlord, looking puzzled.
‘Yes I do!’ replied Mugwort. ‘And I mean what I say, what’s more.’
‘There’s some mistake somewhere,’ said Butterbur, shaking his
head. ‘There was too much of that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing
into thin air; or into thick air, as is more likely in this room.’
‘Well, where is he now?’ cried several voices.
‘How should I know? He’s welcome to go where he will, so long
as he pays in the morning. There’s Mr. Took, now: he’s not vanished.’
‘Well, I saw what I saw, and I saw what I didn’t,’ said Mugwort
obstinately.
‘And I say there’s some mistake,’ repeated Butterbur, picking up
the tray and gathering up the broken crockery.
‘Of course there’s a mistake!’ said Frodo. ‘I haven’t vanished. Here
I am! I’ve just been having a few words with Strider in the corner.’
He came forward into the ﬁrelight; but most of the company
backed away, even more perturbed than before. They were not in
the least satisﬁed by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly
under the tables after he had fallen. Most of the Hobbits and the
Men of Bree went off then and there in a huff, having no fancy for
further entertainment that evening. One or two gave Frodo a black
look and departed muttering among themselves. The Dwarves and
the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before

162

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

long no one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall.
Mr. Butterbur did not seem much put out. He reckoned, very
probably, that his house would be full again on many future nights,
until the present mystery had been thoroughly discussed. ‘Now what
have you been doing, Mr. Underhill?’ he asked. ‘Frightening my
customers and breaking up my crocks with your acrobatics!’
‘I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,’ said Frodo. ‘It was
quite unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.’
‘All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you’re going to do any more
tumbling, or conjuring, or whatever it was, you’d best warn folk
beforehand – and warn me. We’re a bit suspicious round here of
anything out of the way – uncanny, if you understand me; and we
don’t take to it all of a sudden.’
‘I shan’t be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I
promise you. And now I think I’ll be getting to bed. We shall be
making an early start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by eight
o’clock?’
‘Very good! But before you go, I should like a word with you in
private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind
that I ought to tell you. I hope that you’ll not take it amiss. When
I’ve seen to a thing or two, I’ll come along to your room, if you’re
willing.’
‘Certainly!’ said Frodo; but his heart sank. He wondered how
many private talks he would have before he got to bed, and what
they would reveal. Were these people all in league against him? He
began to suspect even old Butterbur’s fat face of concealing dark
designs.

Chapter 10
STRIDER
Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There
was no light. Merry was not there, and the ﬁre had burned low. It
was not until they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown
on a couple of faggots that they discovered Strider had come with
them. There he was calmly sitting in a chair by the door!
‘Hallo!’ said Pippin. ‘Who are you, and what do you want?’
‘I am called Strider,’ he answered; ‘and though he may have forgotten it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.’
‘You said I might hear something to my advantage, I believe,’ said
Frodo. ‘What have you to say?’
‘Several things,’ answered Strider. ‘But, of course, I have my price.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo sharply.
‘Don’t be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you what I know,
and give you some good advice – but I shall want a reward.’
‘And what will that be, pray?’ said Frodo. He suspected now that
he had fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably that he
had brought only a little money with him. All of it would hardly
satisfy a rogue, and he could not spare any of it.
‘No more than you can afford,’ answered Strider with a slow smile,
as if he guessed Frodo’s thoughts. ‘Just this: you must take me along
with you, until I wish to leave you.’
‘Oh, indeed!’ replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved.
‘Even if I wanted another companion, I should not agree to any such
thing, until I knew a good deal more about you, and your business.’
‘Excellent!’ exclaimed Strider, crossing his legs and sitting back
comfortably. ‘You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that
is all to the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well!
I will tell you what I know, and leave the reward to you. You may
be glad to grant it, when you have heard me.’
‘Go on then!’ said Frodo. ‘What do you know?’
‘Too much; too many dark things,’ said Strider grimly. ‘But as
for your business——’ He got up and went to the door, opened it
quickly and looked out. Then he shut it quietly and sat down again.
‘I have quick ears,’ he went on, lowering his voice, ‘and though I
cannot disappear, I have hunted many wild and wary things and I
can usually avoid being seen, if I wish. Now, I was behind the hedge
this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four hobbits came out
of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to old Bombadil

164

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

or to one another; but one thing interested me. Please remember, said
one of them, that the name Baggins must not be mentioned. I am Mr.
Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that
I followed them here. I slipped over the gate just behind them. Maybe
Mr. Baggins has an honest reason for leaving his name behind; but
if so, I should advise him and his friends to be more careful.’
‘I don’t see what interest my name has for anyone in Bree,’ said
Frodo angrily, ‘and I have still to learn why it interests you. Mr.
Strider may have an honest reason for spying and eavesdropping; but
if so, I should advise him to explain it.’
‘Well answered!’ said Strider laughing. ‘But the explanation is
simple: I was looking for a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted
to ﬁnd him quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the
Shire, well, a secret that concerned me and my friends.
‘Now, don’t mistake me!’ he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat,
and Sam jumped up with a scowl. ‘I shall take more care of the secret
than you do. And care is needed!’ He leaned forward and looked
at them. ‘Watch every shadow!’ he said in a low voice. ‘Black horsemen have passed through Bree. On Monday one came down the
Greenway, they say; and another appeared later, coming up the
Greenway from the south.’
There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: ‘I
ought to have guessed it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,’ he
said. ‘And the landlord seems to have heard something. Why did he
press us to join the company? And why on earth did we behave so
foolishly: we ought to have stayed quiet in here.’
‘It would have been better,’ said Strider. ‘I would have stopped
your going into the common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper
would not let me in to see you, or take a message.’
‘Do you think he——’ began Frodo.
‘No, I don’t think any harm of old Butterbur. Only he does not
altogether like mysterious vagabonds of my sort.’ Frodo gave him a
puzzled look. ‘Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?’ said
Strider with a curl of his lip and a queer gleam in his eye. ‘But I
hope we shall get to know one another better. When we do, I hope
you will explain what happened at the end of your song. For that
little prank——’
‘It was sheer accident!’ interrupted Frodo.
‘I wonder,’ said Strider. ‘Accident, then. That accident has made
your position dangerous.’
‘Hardly more than it was already,’ said Frodo. ‘I knew these horsemen were pursuing me; but now at any rate they seem to have missed
me and to have gone away.’

STRIDER

165

‘You must not count on that!’ said Strider sharply. ‘They will
return. And more are coming. There are others. I know their number.
I know these Riders.’ He paused, and his eyes were cold and hard.
‘And there are some folk in Bree who are not to be trusted,’ he went
on. ‘Bill Ferny, for instance. He has an evil name in the Bree-land,
and queer folk call at his house. You must have noticed him among
the company: a swarthy sneering fellow. He was very close with one
of the Southern strangers, and they slipped out together just after
your ‘‘accident’’. Not all of those Southerners mean well; and as
for Ferny, he would sell anything to anybody; or make mischief for
amusement.’
‘What will Ferny sell, and what has my accident got to do with
him?’ said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider’s
hints.
‘News of you, of course,’ answered Strider. ‘An account of your
performance would be very interesting to certain people. After that
they would hardly need to be told your real name. It seems to me
only too likely that they will hear of it before this night is over. Is
that enough? You can do as you like about my reward: take me as a
guide or not. But I may say that I know all the lands between the
Shire and the Misty Mountains, for I have wandered over them for
many years. I am older than I look. I might prove useful. You will
have to leave the open road after tonight; for the horsemen will watch
it night and day. You may escape from Bree, and be allowed to go
forward while the Sun is up; but you won’t go far. They will come
on you in the wild, in some dark place where there is no help. Do
you wish them to ﬁnd you? They are terrible!’
The hobbits looked at him, and saw with surprise that his face
was drawn as if with pain, and his hands clenched the arms of his
chair. The room was very quiet and still, and the light seemed to
have grown dim. For a while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking
in distant memory or listening to sounds in the Night far away.
‘There!’ he cried after a moment, drawing his hand across his
brow. ‘Perhaps I know more about these pursuers than you do. You
fear them, but you do not fear them enough, yet. Tomorrow you will
have to escape, if you can. Strider can take you by paths that are
seldom trodden. Will you have him?’
There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer; his mind was
confused with doubt and fear. Sam frowned, and looked at his master;
and at last he broke out:
‘With your leave, Mr. Frodo, I’d say no! This Strider here, he
warns and he says take care; and I say yes to that, and let’s begin
with him. He comes out of the Wild, and I never heard no good of
such folk. He knows something, that’s plain, and more than I like;

166

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

but it’s no reason why we should let him go leading us out into some
dark place far from help, as he puts it.’
Pippin ﬁdgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply
to Sam, but turned his keen eyes on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance
and looked away. ‘No,’ he said slowly. ‘I don’t agree. I think, I think
you are not really as you choose to look. You began to talk to me
like the Bree-folk, but your voice has changed. Still Sam seems right
in this: I don’t see why you should warn us to take care, and yet ask
us to take you on trust. Why the disguise? Who are you? What do
you really know about – about my business; and how do you know
it?’
‘The lesson in caution has been well learned,’ said Strider with a
grim smile. ‘But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You
will never get to Rivendell now on your own, and to trust me is
your only chance. You must make up your mind. I will answer
some of your questions, if that will help you to do so. But why
should you believe my story, if you do not trust me already? Still
here it is——’
At that moment there came a knock at the door. Mr. Butterbur
had arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot
water. Strider withdrew into a dark corner.
‘I’ve come to bid you good night,’ said the landlord, putting the
candles on the table. ‘Nob! Take the water to the rooms!’ He came
in and shut the door.
‘It’s like this,’ he began, hesitating and looking troubled. ‘If I’ve
done any harm, I’m sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another,
as you’ll admit; and I’m a busy man. But ﬁrst one thing and then
another this week have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and
not too late I hope. You see, I was asked to look out for hobbits of
the Shire, and for one by the name of Baggins in particular.’
‘And what has that got to do with me?’ asked Frodo.
‘Ah! you know best,’ said the landlord, knowingly. ‘I won’t give
you away; but I was told that this Baggins would be going by the
name of Underhill, and I was given a description that ﬁts you well
enough, if I may say so.’
‘Indeed! Let’s have it then!’ said Frodo, unwisely interrupting.
‘A stout little fellow with red cheeks,’ said Mr. Butterbur solemnly.
Pippin chuckled, but Sam looked indignant. ‘That won’t help you
much; it goes for most hobbits, Barley, he says to me,’ continued Mr.
Butterbur with a glance at Pippin. ‘But this one is taller than some and
fairer than most, and he has a cleft in his chin: perky chap with a bright
eye. Begging your pardon, but he said it, not me.’
‘He said it? And who was he?’ asked Frodo eagerly.

STRIDER

167

‘Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they
say he is, but he’s a good friend of mine, whether or no. But now I
don’t know what he’ll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all
my ale sour or me into a block of wood, I shouldn’t wonder. He’s a
bit hasty. Still what’s done can’t be undone.’
‘Well, what have you done?’ said Frodo, getting impatient with
the slow unravelling of Butterbur’s thoughts.
‘Where was I?’ said the landlord, pausing and snapping his ﬁngers.
‘Ah, yes! Old Gandalf. Three months back he walked right into my
room without a knock. Barley, he says, I’m off in the morning. Will
you do something for me? You’ve only to name it, I said. I’m in a hurry,
said he, and I’ve no time myself, but I want a message took to the Shire.
Have you anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can ﬁnd someone, I
said, tomorrow, maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow, he says, and
then he gave me a letter.
‘It’s addressed plain enough,’ said Mr. Butterbur, producing a
letter from his pocket, and reading out the address slowly and proudly
(he valued his reputation as a lettered man):
Mr. FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE.
‘A letter for me from Gandalf !’ cried Frodo.
‘Ah!’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘Then your right name is Baggins?’
‘It is,’ said Frodo, ‘and you had better give me that letter at once,
and explain why you never sent it. That’s what you came to tell
me, I suppose, though you’ve taken a long time to come to the
point.’
Poor Mr. Butterbur looked troubled. ‘You’re right, master,’ he
said, ‘and I beg your pardon. And I’m mortal afraid of what Gandalf
will say, if harm comes of it. But I didn’t keep it back a-purpose. I
put it by safe. Then I couldn’t ﬁnd nobody willing to go to the Shire
next day, nor the day after, and none of my own folk were to spare;
and then one thing after another drove it out of my mind. I’m a busy
man. I’ll do what I can to set matters right, and if there’s any help
I can give, you’ve only to name it.
‘Leaving the letter aside, I promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he
says to me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may be coming out this
way before long, him and another. He’ll be calling himself Underhill. Mind
that! But you need ask no questions. And if I’m not with him, he may be
in trouble, and he may need help. Do whatever you can for him, and I’ll
be grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off,
seemingly.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘These black men,’ said the landlord lowering his voice. ‘They’re

168

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

looking for Baggins, and if they mean well, then I’m a hobbit. It was on
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming.
Uncanny, I called it. Nob, he came and told me that two black men
were at the door asking for a hobbit called Baggins. Nob’s hair was
all stood on end. I bid the black fellows be off, and slammed the
door on them; but they’ve been asking the same question all the way
to Archet, I hear. And that Ranger, Strider, he’s been asking questions, too. Tried to get in here to see you, before you’d had bite or
sup, he did.’
‘He did!’ said Strider suddenly, coming forward into the light.
‘And much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in,
Barliman.’
The landlord jumped with surprise. ‘You!’ he cried. ‘You’re always
popping up. What do you want now?’
‘He’s here with my leave,’ said Frodo. ‘He came to offer me his
help.’
‘Well, you know your own business, maybe,’ said Mr. Butterbur,
looking suspiciously at Strider. ‘But if I was in your plight, I wouldn’t
take up with a Ranger.’
‘Then who would you take up with?’ asked Strider. ‘A fat innkeeper
who only remembers his own name because people shout it at him
all day? They cannot stay in The Pony for ever, and they cannot go
home. They have a long road before them. Will you go with them
and keep the black men off ?’
‘Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn’t do that for any money,’ said Mr.
Butterbur, looking really scared. ‘But why can’t you stay here quiet
for a bit, Mr. Underhill? What are all these queer goings on? What
are these black men after, and where do they come from, I’d like to
know?’
‘I’m sorry I can’t explain it all,’ answered Frodo. ‘I am tired and
very worried, and it’s a long tale. But if you mean to help me, I ought
to warn you that you will be in danger as long as I am in your house.
These Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come
from——’
‘They come from Mordor,’ said Strider in a low voice. ‘From
Mordor, Barliman, if that means anything to you.’
‘Save us!’ cried Mr. Butterbur turning pale; the name evidently
was known to him. ‘That is the worst news that has come to Bree in
my time.’
‘It is,’ said Frodo. ‘Are you still willing to help me?’
‘I am,’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘More than ever. Though I don’t know
what the likes of me can do against, against——’ he faltered.
‘Against the Shadow in the East,’ said Strider quietly. ‘Not much,
Barliman, but every little helps. You can let Mr. Underhill stay here

STRIDER

169

tonight, as Mr. Underhill; and you can forget the name of Baggins,
till he is far away.’
‘I’ll do that,’ said Butterbur. ‘But they’ll ﬁnd out he’s here without
help from me, I’m afraid. It’s a pity Mr. Baggins drew attention to
himself this evening, to say no more. The story of that Mr. Bilbo’s
going off has been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has
been doing some guessing in his slow pate; and there are others in
Bree quicker in the uptake than he is.’
‘Well, we can only hope the Riders won’t come back yet,’ said
Frodo.
‘I hope not, indeed,’ said Butterbur. ‘But spooks or no spooks,
they won’t get in The Pony so easy. Don’t you worry till the morning.
Nob’ll say no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while I can
stand on my legs. Me and my folk’ll keep watch tonight; but you
had best get some sleep, if you can.’
‘In any case we must be called at dawn,’ said Frodo. ‘We must
get off as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.’
‘Right! I’ll see to the orders,’ said the landlord. ‘Good night, Mr.
Baggins – Underhill, I should say! Good night – now, bless me!
Where’s your Mr. Brandybuck?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had forgotten all about Merry, and it was getting late. ‘I am afraid he is out.
He said something about going for a breath of air.’
‘Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might
be on a holiday!’ said Butterbur. ‘I must go and bar the doors quick,
but I’ll see your friend is let in when he comes. I’d better send Nob
to look for him. Good night to you all!’ At last Mr. Butterbur went
out, with another doubtful look at Strider and a shake of his head.
His footsteps retreated down the passage.
‘Well?’ said Strider. ‘When are you going to open that letter?’
Frodo looked carefully at the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly to be Gandalf ’s. Inside, written in the wizard’s strong but
graceful script, was the following message:
THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear’s Day, Shire Year, 1418.
Dear Frodo,
Bad news has reached me here. I must go off at once. You had better
leave Bag End soon, and get out of the Shire before the end of July at
latest. I will return as soon as I can; and I will follow you, if I ﬁnd that
you are gone. Leave a message for me here, if you pass through Bree. You
can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our

170

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

business and will help you. Make for Rivendell. There I hope we may meet
again. If I do not come, Elrond will advise you.
Yours in haste
GANDALF.
PS. Do NOT use It again, not for any reason whatever! Do not travel
by night!
PPS. Make sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn.
All that is gold does not glitter,
Not all those who wander are lost;
The old that is strong does not wither,
Deep roots are not reached by the frost.
From the ashes a ﬁre shall be woken,
A light from the shadows shall spring;
Renewed shall be blade that was broken,
The crownless again shall be king.
PPPS. I hope Butterbur sends this promptly. A worthy man, but his
memory is like a lumber-room: thing wanted always
buried. If he forgets, I shall roast him.
Fare Well!
Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and
Sam. ‘Really old Butterbur has made a mess of things!’ he said. ‘He
deserves roasting. If I had got this at once, we might all have been
safe in Rivendell by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf ?
He writes as if he was going into great danger.’
‘He has been doing that for many years,’ said Strider.
Frodo turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about
Gandalf ’s second postscript. ‘Why didn’t you tell me that you were
Gandalf ’s friend at once?’ he asked. ‘It would have saved time.’
‘Would it? Would any of you have believed me till now?’ said
Strider. ‘I knew nothing of this letter. For all I knew I had to persuade
you to trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I
did not intend to tell you all about myself at once. I had to study
you ﬁrst, and make sure of you. The Enemy has set traps for me
before now. As soon as I had made up my mind, I was ready to tell
you whatever you asked. But I must admit,’ he added with a queer
laugh, ‘that I hoped you would take to me for my own sake. A hunted
man sometimes wearies of distrust and longs for friendship. But there,
I believe my looks are against me.’
‘They are – at ﬁrst sight at any rate,’ laughed Pippin with sudden

STRIDER

171

relief after reading Gandalf ’s letter. ‘But handsome is as handsome
does, as we say in the Shire; and I daresay we shall all look much
the same after lying for days in hedges and ditches.’
‘It would take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering in the Wild to make you look like Strider,’ he answered. ‘And
you would die ﬁrst, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you
look to be.’
Pippin subsided; but Sam was not daunted, and he still eyed
Strider dubiously. ‘How do we know you are the Strider that Gandalf
speaks about?’ he demanded. ‘You never mentioned Gandalf, till this
letter came out. You might be a play-acting spy, for all I can see,
trying to get us to go with you. You might have done in the real
Strider and took his clothes. What have you to say to that?’
‘That you are a stout fellow,’ answered Strider; ‘but I am afraid
my only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real
Strider, I could kill you. And I should have killed you already without
so much talk. If I was after the Ring, I could have it – now!’
He stood up, and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes
gleamed a light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak,
he laid his hand on the hilt of a sword that had hung concealed by
his side. They did not dare to move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring
at him dumbly.
‘But I am the real Strider, fortunately,’ he said, looking down at
them with his face softened by a sudden smile. ‘I am Aragorn son of
Arathorn; and if by life or death I can save you, I will.’
There was a long silence. At last Frodo spoke with hesitation. ‘I
believed that you were a friend before the letter came,’ he said, ‘or
at least I wished to. You have frightened me several times tonight,
but never in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I
imagine. I think one of his spies would – well, seem fairer and feel
fouler, if you understand.’
‘I see,’ laughed Strider. ‘I look foul and feel fair. Is that it? All that
is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.’
‘Did the verses apply to you then?’ asked Frodo. ‘I could not make
out what they were about. But how did you know that they were in
Gandalf ’s letter, if you have never seen it?’
‘I did not know,’ he answered. ‘But I am Aragorn, and those verses
go with that name.’ He drew out his sword, and they saw that the
blade was indeed broken a foot below the hilt. ‘Not much use is it,
Sam?’ said Strider. ‘But the time is near when it shall be forged
anew.’
Sam said nothing.
‘Well,’ said Strider, ‘with Sam’s permission we will call that settled.

172

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Strider shall be your guide. And now I think it is time you went to
bed and took what rest you can. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we are allowed to leave Bree unhindered, we can
hardly hope now to leave it unnoticed. But I shall try to get lost as
soon as possible. I know one or two ways out of Bree-land other than
the main road. If once we shake off the pursuit, I shall make for
Weathertop.’
‘Weathertop?’ said Sam. ‘What’s that?’
‘It is a hill, just to the north of the Road, about half way from
here to Rivendell. It commands a wide view all round; and there we
shall have a chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that
point, if he follows us. After Weathertop our journey will become
more difﬁcult, and we shall have to choose between various dangers.’
‘When did you last see Gandalf ?’ asked Frodo. ‘Do you know
where he is, or what he is doing?’
Strider looked grave. ‘I do not know,’ he said. ‘I came west with
him in the spring. I have often kept watch on the borders of the Shire
in the last few years, when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it
unguarded. We last met on the ﬁrst of May: at Sarn Ford down the
Brandywine. He told me that his business with you had gone well,
and that you would be starting for Rivendell in the last week of
September. As I knew he was at your side, I went away on a journey
of my own. And that has proved ill; for plainly some news reached
him, and I was not at hand to help.
‘I am troubled, for the ﬁrst time since I have known him. We
should have had messages, even if he could not come himself. When
I returned, many days ago, I heard the ill news. The tidings had gone
far and wide that Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been
seen. It was the Elven-folk of Gildor that told me this; and later
they told me that you had left your home; but there was no news
of your leaving Buckland. I have been watching the East Road
anxiously.’
‘Do you think the Black Riders have anything to do with it – with
Gandalf ’s absence, I mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘I do not know of anything else that could have hindered him,
except the Enemy himself,’ said Strider. ‘But do not give up hope!
Gandalf is greater than you Shire-folk know – as a rule you can only
see his jokes and toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest
task.’
Pippin yawned. ‘I am sorry,’ he said, ‘but I am dead tired. In spite
of all the danger and worry I must go to bed, or sleep where I sit.
Where is that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we
had to go out in the dark to look for him.’
*
*
*

STRIDER

173

At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running
along the passage. Merry came in with a rush followed by Nob. He
shut the door hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath.
They stared at him in alarm for a moment before he gasped: ‘I have
seen them, Frodo! I have seen them! Black Riders!’
‘Black Riders!’ cried Frodo. ‘Where?’
‘Here. In the village. I stayed indoors for an hour. Then as you
did not come back, I went out for a stroll. I had come back again
and was standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the
stars. Suddenly I shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a sort of deeper shade among the shadows across
the road, just beyond the edge of the lamplight. It slid away at once
into the dark without a sound. There was no horse.’
‘Which way did it go?’ asked Strider, suddenly and sharply.
Merry started, noticing the stranger for the ﬁrst time. ‘Go on!’
said Frodo. ‘This is a friend of Gandalf ’s. I will explain later.’
‘It seemed to make off up the Road, eastward,’ continued Merry.
‘I tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went
round the corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.’
Strider looked at Merry with wonder. ‘You have a stout heart,’ he
said; ‘but it was foolish.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Merry. ‘Neither brave nor silly, I think. I could
hardly help myself. I seemed to be drawn somehow. Anyway, I went,
and suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and
the other was whispering, or hissing. I couldn’t hear a word that was
said. I did not creep any closer, because I began to tremble all over.
Then I felt terriﬁed, and I turned back, and was just going to bolt
home, when something came behind me and I...I fell over.’
‘I found him, sir,’ put in Nob. ‘Mr. Butterbur sent me out with
a lantern. I went down to West-gate, and then back up towards
South-gate. Just nigh Bill Ferny’s house I thought I could see something in the Road. I couldn’t swear to it, but it looked to me as if
two men was stooping over something, lifting it. I gave a shout, but
when I got up to the spot there was no signs of them, and only Mr.
Brandybuck lying by the roadside. He seemed to be asleep. ‘‘I thought
I had fallen into deep water,’’ he says to me, when I shook him. Very
queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he got up and ran
back here like a hare.’
‘I am afraid that’s true,’ said Merry, ‘though I don’t know what I
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can’t remember. I went to pieces.
I don’t know what came over me.’
‘I do,’ said Strider. ‘The Black Breath. The Riders must have left
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in
secret. They will know all the news now, for they have visited Bill

174

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Ferny; and probably that Southerner was a spy as well. Something
may happen in the night, before we leave Bree.’
‘What will happen?’ said Merry. ‘Will they attack the inn?’
‘No, I think not,’ said Strider. ‘They are not all here yet. And in
any case that is not their way. In dark and loneliness they are strongest; they will not openly attack a house where there are lights and
many people – not until they are desperate, not while all the long
leagues of Eriador still lie before us. But their power is in terror, and
already some in Bree are in their clutch. They will drive these wretches
to some evil work: Ferny, and some of the strangers, and, maybe,
the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at West-gate on
Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when they
left him.’
‘We seem to have enemies all round,’ said Frodo. ‘What are we
to do?’
‘Stay here, and do not go to your rooms! They are sure to have
found out which those are. The hobbit-rooms have windows looking
north and close to the ground. We will all remain together and bar
this window and the door. But ﬁrst Nob and I will fetch your luggage.’
While Strider was gone, Frodo gave Merry a rapid account of
all that had happened since supper. Merry was still reading and
pondering Gandalf ’s letter when Strider and Nob returned.
‘Well Masters,’ said Nob, ‘I’ve rufﬂed up the clothes and put in
a bolster down the middle of each bed. And I made a nice imitation
of your head with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag – Underhill, sir,’
he added with a grin.
Pippin laughed. ‘Very life-like!’ he said. ‘But what will happen
when they have penetrated the disguise?’
‘We shall see,’ said Strider. ‘Let us hope to hold the fort till
morning.’
‘Good night to you,’ said Nob, and went off to take his part in
the watch on the doors.
Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour-ﬂoor. They pushed
a low chair against the door and shut the window. Peering out, Frodo
saw that the night was still clear. The Sickle* was swinging bright
above the shoulders of Bree-hill. He then closed and barred the heavy
inside shutters and drew the curtains together. Strider built up the
ﬁre and blew out all the candles.
The hobbits lay down on their blankets with their feet towards the
hearth; but Strider settled himself in the chair against the door. They
talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask.
‘Jumped over the Moon!’ chuckled Merry as he rolled himself in
* The Hobbits’ name for the Plough or Great Bear.

STRIDER

175

his blanket. ‘Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been
there to see. The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred
years hence.’
‘I hope so,’ said Strider. Then they all fell silent, and one by one
the hobbits dropped off to sleep.

Chapter 11
A KNIFE IN THE DARK
As they prepared for sleep in the inn at Bree, darkness lay on Buckland; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river-bank. The house
at Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously
and peered out. A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day,
and he was unable to rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat
in the breathless night-air. As he stared out into the gloom, a black
shadow moved under the trees; the gate seemed to open of its own
accord and close again without a sound. Terror seized him. He shrank
back, and for a moment he stood trembling in the hall. Then he shut
and locked the door.
The night deepened. There came the soft sound of horses led
with stealth along the lane. Outside the gate they stopped, and three
black ﬁgures entered, like shades of night creeping across the ground.
One went to the door, one to the corner of the house on either side;
and there they stood, as still as the shadows of stones, while night
went slowly on. The house and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting
breathlessly.
There was a faint stir in the leaves, and a cock crowed far away.
The cold hour before dawn was passing. The ﬁgure by the door
moved. In the dark without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed,
as if a chill light had been unsheathed. There was a blow, soft but
heavy, and the door shuddered.
‘Open, in the name of Mordor!’ said a voice thin and menacing.
At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers
burst and lock broken. The black ﬁgures passed swiftly in.
At that moment, among the trees nearby, a horn rang out. It rent
the night like ﬁre on a hill-top.
awake! fear! fire! foes! awake!
Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes
creep from the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish.
And run he did, out of the back door, through the garden, and over
the ﬁelds. When he reached the nearest house, more than a mile
away, he collapsed on the doorstep. ‘No, no, no!’ he was crying. ‘No,
not me! I haven’t got it!’ It was some time before anyone could make
out what he was babbling about. At last they got the idea that enemies

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

177

were in Buckland, some strange invasion from the Old Forest. And
then they lost no more time.
fear! fire! foes!
The Brandybucks were blowing the Horn-call of Buckland, that
had not been sounded for a hundred years, not since the white wolves
came in the Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over.
awake! awake!
Far away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading.
The black ﬁgures ﬂed from the house. One of them let fall a
hobbit-cloak on the step, as he ran. In the lane the noise of hoofs
broke out, and gathering to a gallop, went hammering away into the
darkness. All about Crickhollow there was the sound of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the Black Riders rode
like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow! Sauron would
deal with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they knew
now that the house was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode
down the guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire.
In the early night Frodo woke from deep sleep, suddenly, as if
some sound or presence had disturbed him. He saw that Strider was
sitting alert in his chair: his eyes gleamed in the light of the ﬁre,
which had been tended and was burning brightly; but he made no
sign or movement.
Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled
with the noise of wind and of galloping hoofs. The wind seemed to
be curling round the house and shaking it; and far off he heard a
horn blowing wildly. He opened his eyes, and heard a cock crowing
lustily in the inn-yard. Strider had drawn the curtains and pushed
back the shutters with a clang. The ﬁrst grey light of day was in the
room, and a cold air was coming through the open window.
As soon as Strider had roused them all, he led the way to their
bedrooms. When they saw them they were glad that they had taken
his advice: the windows had been forced open and were swinging,
and the curtains were ﬂapping; the beds were tossed about, and the
bolsters slashed and ﬂung upon the ﬂoor; the brown mat was torn
to pieces.
Strider immediately went to fetch the landlord. Poor Mr.
Butterbur looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his
eyes all night (so he said), but he had never heard a sound.

178

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Never has such a thing happened in my time!’ he cried, raising
his hands in horror. ‘Guests unable to sleep in their beds, and good
bolsters ruined and all! What are we coming to?’
‘Dark times,’ said Strider. ‘But for the present you may be left in
peace, when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never
mind about breakfast: a drink and a bite standing will have to do.
We shall be packed in a few minutes.’
Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were got ready,
and to fetch them a ‘bite’. But very soon he came back in dismay.
The ponies had vanished! The stable-doors had all been opened in
the night, and they were gone: not only Merry’s ponies, but every
other horse and beast in the place.
Frodo was crushed by the news. How could they hope to reach
Rivendell on foot, pursued by mounted enemies? They might as well
set out for the Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the
hobbits, as if he was weighing up their strength and courage.
‘Ponies would not help us to escape horsemen,’ he said at last,
thoughtfully, as if he guessed what Frodo had in mind. ‘We should
not go much slower on foot, not on the roads that I mean to take. I
was going to walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble
me. We cannot count on getting anything to eat between here and
Rivendell, except what we take with us; and we ought to take plenty
to spare; for we may be delayed, or forced to go round-about, far
out of the direct way. How much are you prepared to carry on your
backs?’
‘As much as we must,’ said Pippin with a sinking heart, but trying
to show that he was tougher than he looked (or felt).
‘I can carry enough for two,’ said Sam deﬁantly.
‘Can’t anything be done, Mr. Butterbur?’ asked Frodo. ‘Can’t we
get a couple of ponies in the village, or even one just for the baggage?
I don’t suppose we could hire them, but we might be able to buy
them,’ he added, doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it.
‘I doubt it,’ said the landlord unhappily. ‘The two or three ridingponies that there were in Bree were stabled in my yard, and they’re
gone. As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not,
there are very few of them in Bree, and they won’t be for sale. But
I’ll do what I can. I’ll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as
may be.’
‘Yes,’ said Strider reluctantly, ‘you had better do that. I am afraid
we shall have to try to get one pony at least. But so ends all hope of
starting early, and slipping away quietly! We might as well have blown
a horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no
doubt.’
‘There is one crumb of comfort,’ said Merry, ‘and more than a

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

179

crumb, I hope: we can have breakfast while we wait – and sit down
to it. Let’s get hold of Nob!’
In the end there was more than three hours’ delay. Bob came back
with the report that no horse or pony was to be got for love or money
in the neighbourhood – except one: Bill Ferny had one that he might
possibly sell. ‘A poor old half-starved creature it is,’ said Bob; ‘but
he won’t part with it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how you’re
placed, not if I knows Bill Ferny.’
‘Bill Ferny?’ said Frodo. ‘Isn’t there some trick? Wouldn’t the
beast bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or
something?’
‘I wonder,’ said Strider. ‘But I cannot imagine any animal running
home to him, once it got away. I fancy this is only an afterthought
of kind Master Ferny’s: just a way of increasing his proﬁts from the
affair. The chief danger is that the poor beast is probably at death’s
door. But there does not seem any choice. What does he want for
it?’
Bill Ferny’s price was twelve silver pennies; and that was indeed
at least three times the pony’s value in those parts. It proved to be
a bony, underfed, and dispirited animal; but it did not look like dying
just yet. Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry another
eighteen pence as some compensation for the lost animals. He was
an honest man, and well-off as things were reckoned in Bree; but
thirty silver pennies was a sore blow to him, and being cheated by
Bill Ferny made it harder to bear.
As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It
turned out later that only one horse had been actually stolen. The
others had been driven off, or had bolted in terror, and were found
wandering in different corners of the Bree-land. Merry’s ponies had
escaped altogether, and eventually (having a good deal of sense) they
made their way to the Downs in search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they
came under the care of Tom Bombadil for a while, and were well-off.
But when news of the events at Bree came to Tom’s ears, he sent
them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got ﬁve good beasts at a very fair
price. They had to work harder in Bree, but Bob treated them well;
so on the whole they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous
journey. But they never came to Rivendell.
However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money
was gone for good, or for bad. And he had other troubles. For there
was a great commotion as soon as the remaining guests were astir
and heard news of the raid on the inn. The southern travellers had
lost several horses and blamed the innkeeper loudly, until it became
known that one of their own number had also disappeared in the

180

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

night, none other than Bill Ferny’s squint-eyed companion. Suspicion
fell on him at once.
‘If you pick up with a horse-thief, and bring him to my house,’
said Butterbur angrily, ‘you ought to pay for all the damage yourselves
and not come shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is!’ But it appeared that he was nobody’s friend, and
nobody could recollect when he had joined their party.
After their breakfast the hobbits had to re-pack, and get together
further supplies for the longer journey they were now expecting. It
was close on ten o’clock before they at last got off. By that time the
whole of Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo’s vanishing trick;
the appearance of the black horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and
not least the news that Strider the Ranger had joined the mysterious
hobbits, made such a tale as would last for many uneventful years.
Most of the inhabitants of Bree and Staddle, and many even from
Combe and Archet, were crowded in the road to see the travellers
start. The other guests in the inn were at the doors or hanging out
of the windows.
Strider had changed his mind, and had decided to leave Bree by
the main road. Any attempt to set off across country at once would
only make matters worse: half the inhabitants would follow them, to
see what they were up to, and to prevent them from trespassing.
They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr.
Butterbur with many thanks. ‘I hope we shall meet again some day,
when things are merry once more,’ said Frodo. ‘I should like nothing
better than to stay in your house in peace for a while.’
They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of
the crowd. Not all the faces were friendly, nor all the words that
were shouted. But Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the
Bree-landers, and those that he stared at shut their mouths and drew
away. He walked in front with Frodo; next came Merry and Pippin;
and last came Sam leading the pony, which was laden with as much
of their baggage as they had the heart to give it; but already it looked
less dejected, as if it approved of the change in its fortunes. Sam was
chewing an apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full of them: a parting
present from Nob and Bob. ‘Apples for walking, and a pipe for
sitting,’ he said. ‘But I reckon I’ll miss them both before long.’
The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped
out of doors, or popped over walls and fences, as they passed. But
as they drew near to the further gate, Frodo saw a dark ill-kept house
behind a thick hedge: the last house in the village. In one of the
windows he caught a glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes;
but it vanished at once.

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

181

‘So that’s where that southerner is hiding!’ he thought. ‘He looks
more than half like a goblin.’
Over the hedge another man was staring boldly. He had heavy
black brows, and dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in a
sneer. He was smoking a short black pipe. As they approached he
took it out of his mouth and spat.
‘Morning, Longshanks!’ he said. ‘Off early? Found some friends
at last?’ Strider nodded, but did not answer.
‘Morning, my little friends!’ he said to the others. ‘I suppose you
know who you’ve taken up with? That’s Stick-at-naught Strider, that
is! Though I’ve heard other names not so pretty. Watch out tonight!
And you, Sammie, don’t go ill-treating my poor old pony! Pah!’ He
spat again.
Sam turned quickly. ‘And you, Ferny,’ he said, ‘put your ugly face
out of sight, or it will get hurt.’ With a sudden ﬂick, quick as lightning,
an apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked
too late, and curses came from behind the hedge. ‘Waste of a good
apple,’ said Sam regretfully, and strode on.
At last they left the village behind. The escort of children and
stragglers that had followed them got tired and turned back at the
South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some
miles. It bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it
rounded the feet of Bree-hill, and then it began to run swiftly downwards into wooded country. To their left they could see some of the
houses and hobbit-holes of Staddle on the gentler south-eastern
slopes of the hill; down in a deep hollow away north of the Road
there were wisps of rising smoke that showed where Combe lay;
Archet was hidden in the trees beyond.
After the Road had run down some way, and had left Bree-hill
standing tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that
led off towards the North. ‘This is where we leave the open and take
to cover,’ said Strider.
‘Not a ‘‘short cut’’, I hope,’ said Pippin. ‘Our last short cut through
woods nearly ended in disaster.’
‘Ah, but you had not got me with you then,’ laughed Strider. ‘My
cuts, short or long, don’t go wrong.’ He took a look up and down
the Road. No one was in sight; and he led the way quickly down
towards the wooded valley.
His plan, as far as they could understand it without knowing the
country, was to go towards Archet at ﬁrst, but to bear right and pass
it on the east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild
lands to Weathertop Hill. In that way they would, if all went well,
cut off a great loop of the Road, which further on bent southwards

182

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

to avoid the Midgewater Marshes. But, of course, they would have
to pass through the marshes themselves, and Strider’s description of
them was not encouraging.
However, in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant. Indeed,
if it had not been for the disturbing events of the night before, they
would have enjoyed this part of the journey better than any up to
that time. The sun was shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in
the valley were still leafy and full of colour, and seemed peaceful
and wholesome. Strider guided them conﬁdently among the many
crossing paths, although left to themselves they would soon have
been at a loss. He was taking a wandering course with many turns
and doublings, to put off any pursuit.
‘Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,’
he said; ‘though I don’t think he will follow us himself. He knows
the land round here well enough, but he knows he is not a match
for me in a wood. It is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I
don’t suppose they are far away. If they think we have made for
Archet, so much the better.’
Whether because of Strider’s skill or for some other reason, they saw
no sign and heard no sound of any other living thing all that day:
neither two-footed, except birds; nor four-footed, except one fox and
a few squirrels. The next day they began to steer a steady course
eastwards; and still all was quiet and peaceful. On the third day out
from Bree they came out of the Chetwood. The land had been falling
steadily, ever since they turned aside from the Road, and they now
entered a wide ﬂat expanse of country, much more difﬁcult to manage. They were far beyond the borders of the Bree-land, out in the
pathless wilderness, and drawing near to the Midgewater Marshes.
The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and
there they came upon pools, and wide stretches of reeds and rushes
ﬁlled with the warbling of little hidden birds. They had to pick their
way carefully to keep both dry-footed and on their proper course. At
ﬁrst they made fair progress, but as they went on, their passage
became slower and more dangerous. The marshes were bewildering
and treacherous, and there was no permanent trail even for Rangers
to ﬁnd through their shifting quagmires. The ﬂies began to torment
them, and the air was full of clouds of tiny midges that crept up their
sleeves and breeches and into their hair.
‘I am being eaten alive!’ cried Pippin. ‘Midgewater! There are
more midges than water!’
‘What do they live on when they can’t get hobbit?’ asked Sam,
scratching his neck.
They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country.

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

183

Their camping-place was damp, cold, and uncomfortable; and the
biting insects would not let them sleep. There were also abominable
creatures haunting the reeds and tussocks that from the sound of
them were evil relatives of the cricket. There were thousands of them,
and they squeaked all round, neek-breek, breek-neek, unceasingly all
the night, until the hobbits were nearly frantic.
The next day, the fourth, was little better, and the night almost
as comfortless. Though the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them)
had been left behind, the midges still pursued them.
As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him
that far away there came a light in the eastern sky: it ﬂashed and
faded many times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours
off.
‘What is the light?’ he said to Strider, who had risen, and was
standing, gazing ahead into the night.
‘I do not know,’ Strider answered. ‘It is too distant to make out.
It is like lightning that leaps up from the hill-tops.’
Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the
white ﬂashes, and against them the tall dark ﬁgure of Strider, standing
silent and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep.
They had not gone far on the ﬁfth day when they left the last
straggling pools and reed-beds of the marshes behind them. The land
before them began steadily to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could now see a line of hills. The highest of them was at
the right of the line and a little separated from the others. It had a
conical top, slightly ﬂattened at the summit.
‘That is Weathertop,’ said Strider. ‘The Old Road, which we have
left far away on our right, runs to the south of it and passes not far
from its foot. We might reach it by noon tomorrow, if we go straight
towards it. I suppose we had better do so.’
‘What do you mean?’ asked Frodo.
‘I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall ﬁnd.
It is close to the Road.’
‘But surely we were hoping to ﬁnd Gandalf there?’
‘Yes; but the hope is faint. If he comes this way at all, he may not
pass through Bree, and so he may not know what we are doing. And
anyway, unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one
another; it will not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the
Riders fail to ﬁnd us in the wilderness, they are likely to make for
Weathertop themselves. It commands a wide view all round. Indeed,
there are many birds and beasts in this country that could see us, as
we stand here, from that hill-top. Not all the birds are to be trusted,
and there are other spies more evil than they are.’

184

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The hobbits looked anxiously at the distant hills. Sam looked up
into the pale sky, fearing to see hawks or eagles hovering over them
with bright unfriendly eyes. ‘You do make me feel uncomfortable
and lonesome, Strider!’ he said.
‘What do you advise us to do?’ asked Frodo.
‘I think,’ answered Strider slowly, as if he was not quite sure, ‘I
think the best thing is to go as straight eastward from here as we can,
to make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike
a path I know that runs at their feet; it will bring us to Weathertop
from the north and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.’
All that day they plodded along, until the cold and early evening
came down. The land became drier and more barren; but mists and
vapours lay behind them on the marshes. A few melancholy birds
were piping and wailing, until the round red sun sank slowly into the
western shadows; then an empty silence fell. The hobbits thought of
the soft light of sunset glancing through the cheerful windows of Bag
End far away.
At the day’s end they came to a stream that wandered down from
the hills to lose itself in the stagnant marshland, and they went up
along its banks while the light lasted. It was already night when at
last they halted and made their camp under some stunted alder-trees
by the shores of the stream. Ahead there loomed now against the dusky
sky the bleak and treeless backs of the hills. That night they set a watch,
and Strider, it seemed, did not sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and
in the early night-hours a cold grey light lay on the land.
Next morning they set out again soon after sunrise. There was a
frost in the air, and the sky was a pale clear blue. The hobbits felt
refreshed, as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they
were getting used to much walking on short commons – shorter at
any rate than what in the Shire they would have thought barely
enough to keep them on their legs. Pippin declared that Frodo was
looking twice the hobbit that he had been.
‘Very odd,’ said Frodo, tightening his belt, ‘considering that there
is actually a good deal less of me. I hope the thinning process will
not go on indeﬁnitely, or I shall become a wraith.’
‘Do not speak of such things!’ said Strider quickly, and with surprising earnestness.
The hills drew nearer. They made an undulating ridge, often rising
almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low
clefts or passes leading into the eastern land beyond. Along the crest
of the ridge the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of
green-grown walls and dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

185

ruins of old works of stone. By night they had reached the feet of
the westward slopes, and there they camped. It was the night of the
ﬁfth of October, and they were six days out from Bree.
In the morning they found, for the ﬁrst time since they had left
the Chetwood, a track plain to see. They turned right and followed
it southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so
as to keep as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the
hill-tops above and of the ﬂats to the west. It dived into dells, and
hugged steep banks; and where it passed over ﬂatter and more open
ground on either side of it there were lines of large boulders and
hewn stones that screened the travellers almost like a hedge.
‘I wonder who made this path, and what for,’ said Merry, as they
walked along one of these avenues, where the stones were unusually
large and closely set. ‘I am not sure that I like it: it has a – well,
rather a barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?’
‘No. There is no barrow on Weathertop, nor on any of these hills,’
answered Strider. ‘The Men of the West did not live here; though
in their latter days they defended the hills for a while against the evil
that came out of Angmar. This path was made to serve the forts along
the walls. But long before, in the ﬁrst days of the North Kingdom, they
built a great watch-tower on Weathertop, Amon Sûl they called it. It
was burned and broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled
ring, like a rough crown on the old hill’s head. Yet once it was tall and
fair. It is told that Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gilgalad out of the West, in the days of the Last Alliance.’
The hobbits gazed at Strider. It seemed that he was learned in old
lore, as well as in the ways of the wild. ‘Who was Gil-galad?’ asked
Merry; but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought.
Suddenly a low voice murmured:
Gil-galad was an Elven-king.
Of him the harpers sadly sing:
the last whose realm was fair and free
between the Mountains and the Sea.
His sword was long, his lance was keen,
his shining helm afar was seen;
the countless stars of heaven’s ﬁeld
were mirrored in his silver shield.
But long ago he rode away,
and where he dwelleth none can say;
for into darkness fell his star
in Mordor where the shadows are.

186

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam’s.
‘Don’t stop!’ said Merry.
‘That’s all I know,’ stammered Sam, blushing. ‘I learned it from
Mr. Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to tell me tales like that, knowing
how I was always one for hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo as
taught me my letters. He was mighty book-learned was dear old
Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote poetry. He wrote what I have just said.’
‘He did not make it up,’ said Strider. ‘It is part of the lay that is
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must
have translated it. I never knew that.’
‘There was a lot more,’ said Sam, ‘all about Mordor. I didn’t learn
that part, it gave me the shivers. I never thought I should be going
that way myself !’
‘Going to Mordor!’ cried Pippin. ‘I hope it won’t come to that!’
‘Do not speak that name so loudly!’ said Strider.
It was already mid-day when they drew near the southern end of
the path, and saw before them, in the pale clear light of the October
sun, a grey-green bank, leading up like a bridge on to the northward
slope of the hill. They decided to make for the top at once, while the
daylight was broad. Concealment was no longer possible, and they
could only hope that no enemy or spy was observing them. Nothing
was to be seen moving on the hill. If Gandalf was anywhere about,
there was no sign of him.
On the western ﬂank of Weathertop they found a sheltered hollow,
at the bottom of which there was a bowl-shaped dell with grassy
sides. There they left Sam and Pippin with the pony and their packs
and luggage. The other three went on. After half an hour’s plodding
climb Strider reached the crown of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last slope had been steep and rocky.
On the top they found, as Strider had said, a wide ring of ancient
stone-work, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in
the centre a cairn of broken stones had been piled. They were blackened as if with ﬁre. About them the turf was burned to the roots and
all within the ring the grass was scorched and shrivelled, as if ﬂames
had swept the hill-top; but there was no sign of any living thing.
Standing upon the rim of the ruined circle, they saw all round
below them a wide prospect, for the most part of lands empty and
featureless, except for patches of woodland away to the south, beyond
which they caught here and there the glint of distant water. Beneath
them on this southern side there ran like a ribbon the Old Road,
coming out of the West and winding up and down, until it faded
behind a ridge of dark land to the east. Nothing was moving on it.
Following its line eastward with their eyes they saw the Mountains:

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

187

the nearer foothills were brown and sombre; behind them stood taller
shapes of grey, and behind those again were high white peaks glimmering among the clouds.
‘Well, here we are!’ said Merry. ‘And very cheerless and uninviting
it looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf.
But I don’t blame him for not waiting – if he ever came here.’
‘I wonder,’ said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. ‘Even if he
was a day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here ﬁrst.
He can ride very swiftly when need presses.’ Suddenly he stooped
and looked at the stone on the top of the cairn; it was ﬂatter than
the others, and whiter, as if it had escaped the ﬁre. He picked it up
and examined it, turning it in his ﬁngers. ‘This has been handled
recently,’ he said. ‘What do you think of these marks?’
On the ﬂat under-side Frodo saw some scratches:
. ‘There
seems to be a stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,’ he said.
‘The stroke on the left might be a G-rune with thin branches,’
said Strider. ‘It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot
be sure. The scratches are ﬁne, and they certainly look fresh. But the
marks might mean something quite different, and have nothing to
do with us. Rangers use runes, and they come here sometimes.’
‘What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?’ asked Merry.
‘I should say,’ answered Strider, ‘that they stood for G3, and were
a sign that Gandalf was here on October the third: that is three days
ago now. It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was
at hand, so that he had no time or did not dare to write anything
longer or plainer. If that is so, we must be wary.’
‘I wish we could feel sure that he made the marks, whatever they
may mean,’ said Frodo. ‘It would be a great comfort to know that
he was on the way, in front of us or behind us.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Strider. ‘For myself, I believe that he was here,
and was in danger. There have been scorching ﬂames here; and now
the light that we saw three nights ago in the eastern sky comes back
to my mind. I guess that he was attacked on this hill-top, but with
what result I cannot tell. He is here no longer, and we must now
look after ourselves and make our own way to Rivendell, as best we
can.’
‘How far is Rivendell?’ asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The
world looked wild and wide from Weathertop.
‘I don’t know if the Road has ever been measured in miles beyond
the Forsaken Inn, a day’s journey east of Bree,’ answered Strider.
‘Some say it is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road,
and folk are glad to reach their journey’s end, whether the time is
long or short. But I know how long it would take me on my own
feet, with fair weather and no ill fortune: twelve days from here to

188

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses the Loudwater that
runs out of Rivendell. We have at least a fortnight’s journey before
us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.’
‘A fortnight!’ said Frodo. ‘A lot may happen in that time.’
‘It may,’ said Strider.
They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward
edge. In that lonely place Frodo for the ﬁrst time fully realized his
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left
him in the quiet and beloved Shire. He stared down at the hateful
Road, leading back westward – to his home. Suddenly he was aware
that two black specks were moving slowly along it, going westward;
and looking again he saw that three others were creeping eastward
to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched Strider’s arm.
‘Look,’ he said, pointing downwards.
At once Strider ﬂung himself on the ground behind the ruined
circle, pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside.
‘What is it?’ he whispered.
‘I do not know, but I fear the worst,’ answered Strider.
Slowly they crawled up to the edge of the ring again, and peered
through a cleft between two jagged stones. The light was no longer
bright, for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of
the East had now overtaken the sun, as it began to go down. They
could all see the black specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could
make out their shapes for certain; yet something told them that there,
far below, were Black Riders assembling on the Road beyond the
foot of the hill.
‘Yes,’ said Strider, whose keener sight left him in no doubt. ‘The
enemy is here!’
Hastily they crept away and slipped down the north side of the
hill to ﬁnd their companions.
Sam and Peregrin had not been idle. They had explored the small
dell and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they found a spring
of clear water in the hillside, and near it footprints not more than a
day or two old. In the dell itself they found recent traces of a ﬁre,
and other signs of a hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on
the edge of the dell nearest to the hill. Behind them Sam came upon
a small store of ﬁrewood neatly stacked.
‘I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,’ he said to Pippin. ‘Whoever it was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.’
Strider was greatly interested in these discoveries. ‘I wish I had
waited and explored the ground down here myself,’ he said, hurrying
off to the spring to examine the footprints.

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

189

‘It is just as I feared,’ he said, when he came back. ‘Sam and
Pippin have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or
confused. Rangers have been here lately. It is they who left the ﬁrewood behind. But there are also several newer tracks that were not
made by Rangers. At least one set was made, only a day or two ago,
by heavy boots. At least one. I cannot now be certain, but I think there
were many booted feet.’ He paused and stood in anxious thought.
Each of the hobbits saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and
booted Riders. If the horsemen had already found the dell, the sooner
Strider led them somewhere else the better. Sam viewed the hollow
with great dislike, now that he had heard news of their enemies on
the Road, only a few miles away.
‘Hadn’t we better clear out quick, Mr. Strider?’ he asked impatiently. ‘It is getting late, and I don’t like this hole: it makes my
heart sink somehow.’
‘Yes, we certainly must decide what to do at once,’ answered
Strider, looking up and considering the time and the weather. ‘Well,
Sam,’ he said at last, ‘I do not like this place either; but I cannot
think of anywhere better that we could reach before nightfall. At least
we are out of sight for the moment, and if we moved we should be
much more likely to be seen by spies. All we could do would be to
go right out of our way back north on this side of the line of hills,
where the land is all much the same as it is here. The Road is watched,
but we should have to cross it, if we tried to take cover in the thickets
away to the south. On the north side of the Road beyond the hills
the country is bare and ﬂat for miles.’
‘Can the Riders see?’ asked Merry. ‘I mean, they seem usually to
have used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling
is the right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down
ﬂat when you saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen,
if we move.’
‘I was too careless on the hill-top,’ answered Strider. ‘I was very
anxious to ﬁnd some sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three
of us to go up and stand there so long. For the black horses can see,
and the Riders can use men and other creatures as spies, as we found
at Bree. They themselves do not see the world of light as we do, but
our shapes cast shadows in their minds, which only the noon sun
destroys; and in the dark they perceive many signs and forms that
are hidden from us: then they are most to be feared. And at all times
they smell the blood of living things, desiring and hating it. Senses,
too, there are other than sight or smell. We can feel their presence
– it troubled our hearts, as soon as we came here, and before we saw
them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,’ he added, and his voice sank
to a whisper, ‘the Ring draws them.’

190

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Is there no escape then?’ said Frodo, looking round wildly. ‘If I
move I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to
me!’
Strider laid his hand on his shoulder. ‘There is still hope,’ he said.
‘You are not alone. Let us take this wood that is set ready for the
ﬁre as a sign. There is little shelter or defence here, but ﬁre shall
serve for both. Sauron can put ﬁre to his evil uses, as he can all
things, but these Riders do not love it, and fear those who wield it.
Fire is our friend in the wilderness.’
‘Maybe,’ muttered Sam. ‘It is also as good a way of saying ‘‘here
we are’’ as I can think of, bar shouting.’
Down in the lowest and most sheltered corner of the dell they lit
a ﬁre, and prepared a meal. The shades of evening began to fall, and
it grew cold. They were suddenly aware of great hunger, for they had
not eaten anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more
than a frugal supper. The lands ahead were empty of all save birds
and beasts, unfriendly places deserted by all the races of the world.
Rangers passed at times beyond the hills, but they were few and did
not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of evil sort: trolls might
stray down at times out of the northern valleys of the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road would travellers be found, most often
dwarves, hurrying along on business of their own, and with no help
and few words to spare for strangers.
‘I don’t see how our food can be made to last,’ said Frodo. ‘We
have been careful enough in the last few days, and this supper is no
feast; but we have used more than we ought, if we have two weeks
still to go, and perhaps more.’
‘There is food in the wild,’ said Strider; ‘berry, root, and herb;
and I have some skill as a hunter at need. You need not be afraid of
starving before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long
and weary work, and we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think
with hope of the tables of Elrond’s house!’
The cold increased as darkness came on. Peering out from the
edge of the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now vanishing
quickly into shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly
ﬁlled with twinkling stars. Frodo and his companions huddled round
the ﬁre, wrapped in every garment and blanket they possessed; but
Strider was content with a single cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing
thoughtfully at his pipe.
As night fell and the light of the ﬁre began to shine out brightly
he began to tell them tales to keep their minds from fear. He knew
many histories and legends of long ago, of Elves and Men and the

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

191

good and evil deeds of the Elder Days. They wondered how old he
was, and where he had learned all this lore.
‘Tell us of Gil-galad,’ said Merry suddenly, when he paused at
the end of a story of the Elf-kingdoms. ‘Do you know any more of
that old lay that you spoke of ?’
‘I do indeed,’ answered Strider. ‘So also does Frodo, for it concerns us closely.’ Merry and Pippin looked at Frodo, who was staring
into the ﬁre.
‘I know only the little that Gandalf has told me,’ said Frodo slowly.
‘Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth.
Gil-galad is Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he
went to the land of——’
‘No!’ said Strider interrupting, ‘I do not think that tale should be
told now with the servants of the Enemy at hand. If we win through
to the house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.’
‘Then tell us some other tale of the old days,’ begged Sam; ‘a tale
about the Elves before the fading time. I would dearly like to hear
more about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.’
‘I will tell you the tale of Tinúviel,’ said Strider, ‘in brief – for it
is a long tale of which the end is not known; and there are none now,
except Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old. It is a
fair tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet
it may lift up your hearts.’ He was silent for some time, and then he
began not to speak but to chant softly:
The leaves were long, the grass was green,
The hemlock-umbels tall and fair,
And in the glade a light was seen
Of stars in shadow shimmering.
Tinúviel was dancing there
To music of a pipe unseen,
And light of stars was in her hair,
And in her raiment glimmering.
There Beren came from mountains cold,
And lost he wandered under leaves,
And where the Elven-river rolled
He walked alone and sorrowing.
He peered between the hemlock-leaves
And saw in wonder ﬂowers of gold
Upon her mantle and her sleeves,
And her hair like shadow following.

192

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Enchantment healed his weary feet
That over hills were doomed to roam;
And forth he hastened, strong and ﬂeet,
And grasped at moonbeams glistening.
Through woven woods in Elvenhome
She lightly ﬂed on dancing feet,
And left him lonely still to roam
In the silent forest listening.
He heard there oft the ﬂying sound
Of feet as light as linden-leaves,
Or music welling underground,
In hidden hollows quavering.
Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves,
And one by one with sighing sound
Whispering fell the beechen leaves
In the wintry woodland wavering.
He sought her ever, wandering far
Where leaves of years were thickly strewn,
By light of moon and ray of star
In frosty heavens shivering.
Her mantle glinted in the moon,
As on a hill-top high and far
She danced, and at her feet was strewn
A mist of silver quivering.
When winter passed, she came again,
And her song released the sudden spring,
Like rising lark, and falling rain,
And melting water bubbling.
He saw the elven-ﬂowers spring
About her feet, and healed again
He longed by her to dance and sing
Upon the grass untroubling.
Again she ﬂed, but swift he came.
Tinúviel! Tinúviel!
He called her by her Elvish name;
And there she halted listening.
One moment stood she, and a spell
His voice laid on her: Beren came,
And doom fell on Tinúviel
That in his arms lay glistening.

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

193

As Beren looked into her eyes
Within the shadows of her hair,
The trembling starlight of the skies
He saw there mirrored shimmering.
Tinúviel the elven-fair,
Immortal maiden elven-wise,
About him cast her shadowy hair
And arms like silver glimmering.
Long was the way that fate them bore,
O’er stony mountains cold and grey,
Through halls of iron and darkling door,
And woods of nightshade morrowless.
The Sundering Seas between them lay,
And yet at last they met once more,
And long ago they passed away
In the forest singing sorrowless.
Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again. ‘That is a song,’
he said, ‘in the mode that is called ann-thennath among the Elves,
but is hard to render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough
echo of it. It tells of the meeting of Beren son of Barahir and Lúthien
Tinúviel. Beren was a mortal man, but Lúthien was the daughter of
Thingol, a King of Elves upon Middle-earth when the world was
young; and she was the fairest maiden that has ever been among all
the children of this world. As the stars above the mists of the Northern
lands was her loveliness, and in her face was a shining light. In those
days the Great Enemy, of whom Sauron of Mordor was but a servant,
dwelt in Angband in the North, and the Elves of the West coming
back to Middle-earth made war upon him to regain the Silmarils
which he had stolen; and the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But
the Enemy was victorious and Barahir was slain, and Beren escaping
through great peril came over the Mountains of Terror into the
hidden Kingdom of Thingol in the forest of Neldoreth. There he
beheld Lúthien singing and dancing in a glade beside the enchanted
river Esgalduin; and he named her Tinúviel, that is Nightingale in
the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and they
were parted long. Tinúviel rescued Beren from the dungeons of
Sauron, and together they passed through great dangers, and cast
down even the Great Enemy from his throne, and took from his iron
crown one of the three Silmarils, brightest of all jewels, to be the
bride-price of Lúthien to Thingol her father. Yet at the last Beren
was slain by the Wolf that came from the gates of Angband, and he
died in the arms of Tinúviel. But she chose mortality, and to die

194

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

from the world, so that she might follow him; and it is sung that they
met again beyond the Sundering Seas, and after a brief time walking
alive once more in the green woods, together they passed, long ago,
beyond the conﬁnes of this world. So it is that Lúthien Tinúviel alone
of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left the world, and they have
lost her whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the
Elf-lords of old descended among Men. There live still those of whom
Lúthien was the foremother, and it is said that her line shall never
fail. Elrond of Rivendell is of that Kin. For of Beren and Lúthien
was born Dior Thingol’s heir; and of him Elwing the White whom
Eärendil wedded, he that sailed his ship out of the mists of the world
into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril upon his brow. And of
Eärendil came the Kings of Númenor, that is Westernesse.’
As Strider was speaking they watched his strange eager face, dimly
lit in the red glow of the wood-ﬁre. His eyes shone, and his voice
was rich and deep. Above him was a black starry sky. Suddenly a
pale light appeared over the crown of Weathertop behind him. The
waxing moon was climbing slowly above the hill that overshadowed
them, and the stars above the hill-top faded.
The story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. ‘Look!’ said
Merry. ‘The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.’
The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on the top
of the hill something small and dark against the glimmer of the moonrise. It was perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by
the pale light.
Sam and Merry got up and walked away from the ﬁre. Frodo and
Pippin remained seated in silence. Strider was watching the moonlight on the hill intently. All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt a
cold dread creeping over his heart, now that Strider was no longer
speaking. He huddled closer to the ﬁre. At that moment Sam came
running back from the edge of the dell.
‘I don’t know what it is,’ he said, ‘but I suddenly felt afraid. I
durstn’t go outside this dell for any money; I felt that something was
creeping up the slope.’
‘Did you see anything?’ asked Frodo, springing to his feet.
‘No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn’t stop to look.’
‘I saw something,’ said Merry; ‘or I thought I did – away westwards
where the moonlight was falling on the ﬂats beyond the shadow of
the hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They
seemed to be moving this way.’
‘Keep close to the ﬁre, with your faces outward!’ cried Strider.
‘Get some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!’
For a breathless time they sat there, silent and alert, with their
backs turned to the wood-ﬁre, each gazing into the shadows that

A KNIFE IN THE DARK

195

encircled them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or movement in the night. Frodo stirred, feeling that he must break the
silence: he longed to shout out aloud.
‘Hush!’ whispered Strider. ‘What’s that?’ gasped Pippin at the
same moment.
Over the lip of the little dell, on the side away from the hill, they
felt, rather than saw, a shadow rise, one shadow or more than one.
They strained their eyes, and the shadows seemed to grow. Soon
there could be no doubt: three or four tall black ﬁgures were standing
there on the slope, looking down on them. So black were they that
they seemed like black holes in the deep shade behind them. Frodo
thought that he heard a faint hiss as of venomous breath and felt a
thin piercing chill. Then the shapes slowly advanced.
Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves
ﬂat on the ground. Sam shrank to Frodo’s side. Frodo was hardly
less terriﬁed than his companions; he was quaking as if he was bitter
cold, but his terror was swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put
on the Ring. The desire to do this laid hold of him, and he could
think of nothing else. He did not forget the Barrow, nor the message
of Gandalf; but something seemed to be compelling him to disregard
all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with the hope of escape,
or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt that he must
take the Ring and put it on his ﬁnger. He could not speak. He felt
Sam looking at him, as if he knew that his master was in some great
trouble, but he could not turn towards him. He shut his eyes and
struggled for a while; but resistance became unbearable, and at last
he slowly drew out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the foreﬁnger
of his left hand.
Immediately, though everything else remained as before, dim and
dark, the shapes became terribly clear. He was able to see beneath
their black wrappings. There were ﬁve tall ﬁgures: two standing on
the lip of the dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned keen
and merciless eyes; under their mantles were long grey robes; upon
their grey hairs were helms of silver; in their haggard hands were
swords of steel. Their eyes fell on him and pierced him, as they rushed
towards him. Desperate, he drew his own sword, and it seemed to
him that it ﬂickered red, as if it was a ﬁrebrand. Two of the ﬁgures
halted. The third was taller than the others: his hair was long and
gleaming and on his helm was a crown. In one hand he held a long
sword, and in the other a knife; both the knife and the hand that
held it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down
on Frodo.
At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on the ground, and
he heard himself crying aloud: O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same

196

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

time he struck at the feet of his enemy. A shrill cry rang out in the
night; and he felt a pain like a dart of poisoned ice pierce his left
shoulder. Even as he swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist,
a glimpse of Strider leaping out of the darkness with a ﬂaming
brand of wood in either hand. With a last effort Frodo, dropping his
sword, slipped the Ring from his ﬁnger and closed his right hand tight
upon it.

Chapter 12
FLIGHT TO THE FORD
When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately. He was lying by the ﬁre, which was now piled high and burning
brightly. His three companions were bending over him.
‘What has happened? Where is the pale king?’ he asked wildly.
They were too overjoyed to hear him speak to answer for a while;
nor did they understand his question. At length he gathered from
Sam that they had seen nothing but the vague shadowy shapes coming
towards them. Suddenly to his horror Sam found that his master had
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and
he fell. He heard Frodo’s voice, but it seemed to come from a great
distance, or from under the earth, crying out strange words. They
saw nothing more, until they stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying
as if dead, face downwards on the grass with his sword beneath him.
Strider ordered them to pick him up and lay him near the ﬁre, and
then he disappeared. That was now a good while ago.
Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider;
but while they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out of
the shadows. They started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over
Frodo; but Strider knelt down swiftly at his side.
‘I am not a Black Rider, Sam,’ he said gently, ‘nor in league with
them. I have been trying to discover something of their movements;
but I have found nothing. I cannot think why they have gone and do
not attack again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere
at hand.’
When he heard what Frodo had to tell, he became full of concern,
and shook his head and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry
to heat as much water as they could in their small kettles, and to
bathe the wound with it. ‘Keep the ﬁre going well, and keep Frodo
warm!’ he said. Then he got up and walked away, and called Sam
to him. ‘I think I understand things better now,’ he said in a low
voice. ‘There seem only to have been ﬁve of the enemy. Why they
were not all here, I don’t know; but I don’t think they expected to
be resisted. They have drawn off for the time being. But not far, I
fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape. They
are only waiting, because they think that their purpose is almost
accomplished, and that the Ring cannot ﬂy much further. I fear,
Sam, that they believe your master has a deadly wound that will
subdue him to their will. We shall see!’

198

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Sam choked with tears. ‘Don’t despair!’ said Strider. ‘You must
trust me now. Your Frodo is made of sterner stuff than I had guessed,
though Gandalf hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and I
think he will resist the evil power of the wound longer than his
enemies expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him
well, while I am away!’ He hurried off and disappeared again into
the darkness.
Frodo dozed, though the pain of his wound was slowly growing, and
a deadly chill was spreading from his shoulder to his arm and side.
His friends watched over him, warming him, and bathing his wound.
The night passed slowly and wearily. Dawn was growing in the sky,
and the dell was ﬁlling with grey light, when Strider at last returned.
‘Look!’ he cried; and stooping he lifted from the ground a black
cloak that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the
lower hem there was a slash. ‘This was the stroke of Frodo’s sword,’
he said. ‘The only hurt that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is
unharmed, but all blades perish that pierce that dreadful King. More
deadly to him was the name of Elbereth.’
‘And more deadly to Frodo was this!’ He stooped again and lifted
up a long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised
it they saw that near the end its edge was notched and the point was
broken off. But even as he held it up in the growing light, they gazed in
astonishment, for the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke
in the air, leaving only the hilt in Strider’s hand. ‘Alas!’ he cried. ‘It
was this accursed knife that gave the wound. Few now have the skill in
healing to match such evil weapons. But I will do what I can.’
He sat down on the ground, and taking the dagger-hilt laid it on
his knees, and he sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then
setting it aside, he turned to Frodo and in a soft tone spoke words
the others could not catch. From the pouch at his belt he drew out
the long leaves of a plant.
‘These leaves,’ he said, ‘I have walked far to ﬁnd; for this plant
does not grow in the bare hills; but in the thickets away south of the
Road I found it in the dark by the scent of its leaves.’ He crushed a
leaf in his ﬁngers, and it gave out a sweet and pungent fragrance. ‘It
is fortunate that I could ﬁnd it, for it is a healing plant that the Men
of the West brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they named it, and it
grows now sparsely and only near places where they dwelt or camped
of old; and it is not known in the North, except to some of those
who wander in the Wild. It has great virtues, but over such a wound
as this its healing powers may be small.’
He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo’s shoulder. The fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

199

unhurt felt their minds calmed and cleared. The herb had also some
power over the wound, for Frodo felt the pain and also the sense of
frozen cold lessen in his side; but the life did not return to his arm,
and he could not raise or use his hand. He bitterly regretted his
foolishness, and reproached himself for weakness of will; for he now
perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed not his own desire
but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he would
remain maimed for life, and how they would now manage to continue
their journey. He felt too weak to stand.
The others were discussing this very question. They quickly
decided to leave Weathertop as soon as possible. ‘I think now,’ said
Strider, ‘that the enemy has been watching this place for some days.
If Gandalf ever came here, then he must have been forced to ride
away, and he will not return. In any case we are in great peril here
after dark, since the attack of last night, and we can hardly meet
greater danger wherever we go.’
As soon as the daylight was full, they had some hurried food and
packed. It was impossible for Frodo to walk, so they divided the
greater part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo
on the pony. In the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed fatter and stronger, and had begun to show
an affection for its new masters, especially for Sam. Bill Ferny’s
treatment must have been very hard for the journey in the wild to
seem so much better than its former life.
They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing
the Road, but it was the quickest way to more wooded country. And
they needed fuel; for Strider said that Frodo must be kept warm,
especially at night, while ﬁre would be some protection for them all.
It was also his plan to shorten their journey by cutting across another
great loop of the Road: east beyond Weathertop it changed its course
and took a wide bend northwards.
They made their way slowly and cautiously round the southwestern slopes of the hill, and came in a little while to the edge of
the Road. There was no sign of the Riders. But even as they were
hurrying across they heard far away two cries: a cold voice calling
and a cold voice answering. Trembling they sprang forward, and
made for the thickets that lay ahead. The land before them sloped
away southwards, but it was wild and pathless; bushes and stunted
trees grew in dense patches with wide barren spaces in between. The
grass was scanty, coarse, and grey; and the leaves in the thickets were
faded and falling. It was a cheerless land, and their journey was slow
and gloomy. They spoke little as they trudged along. Frodo’s heart
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads

200

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

down, and their backs bowed under their burdens. Even Strider
seemed tired and heavy-hearted.
Before the ﬁrst day’s march was over Frodo’s pain began to grow
again, but he did not speak of it for a long time. Four days passed,
without the ground or the scene changing much, except that behind
them Weathertop slowly sank, and before them the distant mountains
loomed a little nearer. Yet since that far cry they had seen and heard
no sign that the enemy had marked their ﬂight or followed them.
They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch in pairs by night,
expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the grey night,
dimly lit by the cloud-veiled moon; but they saw nothing, and heard
no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once did
they feel the sense of present evil that had assailed them before the
attack in the dell. It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had
already lost their trail again. Perhaps they were waiting to make some
ambush in a narrow place?
At the end of the ﬁfth day the ground began once more to rise
slowly out of the wide shallow valley into which they had descended.
Strider now turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the
sixth day they reached the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and
saw far ahead a huddle of wooded hills. Away below them they could
see the Road sweeping round the feet of the hills; and to their right
a grey river gleamed pale in the thin sunshine. In the distance they
glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley half-veiled in mist.
‘I am afraid we must go back to the Road here for a while,’ said
Strider. ‘We have now come to the River Hoarwell, that the Elves
call Mitheithel. It ﬂows down out of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells
north of Rivendell, and joins the Loudwater away in the South. Some
call it the Greyﬂood after that. It is a great water before it ﬁnds the
Sea. There is no way over it below its sources in the Ettenmoors,
except by the Last Bridge on which the Road crosses.’
‘What is that other river we can see far away there?’ asked Merry.
‘That is Loudwater, the Bruinen of Rivendell,’ answered Strider.
‘The Road runs along the edge of the hills for many miles from the
Bridge to the Ford of Bruinen. But I have not yet thought how we
shall cross that water. One river at a time! We shall be fortunate
indeed if we do not ﬁnd the Last Bridge held against us.’
Next day, early in the morning, they came down again to the
borders of the Road. Sam and Strider went forward, but they found
no sign of any travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills
there had been some rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days
before, and had washed away all footprints. No horseman had passed
since then, as far as he could see.

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

201

They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after
a mile or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a
short steep slope. They dreaded to see black ﬁgures waiting there,
but they saw none. Strider made them take cover in a thicket at the
side of the Road, while he went forward to explore.
Before long he came hurrying back. ‘I can see no sign of the
enemy,’ he said, ‘and I wonder very much what that means. But I
have found something very strange.’
He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. ‘I
found it in the mud in the middle of the Bridge,’ he said. ‘It is a
beryl, an elf-stone. Whether it was set there, or let fall by chance, I
cannot say; but it brings hope to me. I will take it as a sign that we
may pass the Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep to the Road,
without some clearer token.’
At once they went on again. They crossed the Bridge in safety,
hearing no sound but the water swirling against its three great arches.
A mile further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the steep lands on the left of the Road. Here Strider
turned aside, and soon they were lost in a sombre country of dark
trees winding among the feet of sullen hills.
The hobbits were glad to leave the cheerless lands and the perilous
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and
unfriendly. As they went forward the hills about them steadily rose.
Here and there upon heights and ridges they caught glimpses of
ancient walls of stone, and the ruins of towers: they had an ominous
look. Frodo, who was not walking, had time to gaze ahead and to
think. He recalled Bilbo’s account of his journey and the threatening
towers on the hills north of the Road, in the country near the Trolls’
wood where his ﬁrst serious adventure had happened. Frodo guessed
that they were now in the same region, and wondered if by chance
they would pass near the spot.
‘Who lives in this land?’ he asked. ‘And who built these towers?
Is this troll-country?’
‘No!’ said Strider. ‘Trolls do not build. No one lives in this land.
Men once dwelt here, ages ago; but none remain now. They became
an evil people, as legends tell, for they fell under the shadow of
Angmar. But all were destroyed in the war that brought the North
Kingdom to its end. But that is now so long ago that the hills have
forgotten them, though a shadow still lies on the land.’
‘Where did you learn such tales, if all the land is empty and forgetful?’ asked Peregrin. ‘The birds and beasts do not tell tales of that
sort.’
‘The heirs of Elendil do not forget all things past,’ said Strider;

202

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘and many more things than I can tell are remembered in Rivendell.’
‘Have you often been to Rivendell?’ said Frodo.
‘I have,’ said Strider. ‘I dwelt there once, and still I return when
I may. There my heart is; but it is not my fate to sit in peace, even
in the fair house of Elrond.’
The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on
its way to the River Bruinen, but both were now hidden from view.
The travellers came into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark
and silent. Trees with old and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and
piled up behind into mounting slopes of pine-wood.
The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had
to pick their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen
trees and tumbled rocks. As long as they could they avoided climbing
for Frodo’s sake, and because it was in fact difﬁcult to ﬁnd any way
up out of the narrow dales. They had been two days in this country
when the weather turned wet. The wind began to blow steadily out
of the West and pour the water of the distant seas on the dark heads
of the hills in ﬁne drenching rain. By nightfall they were all soaked,
and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get any ﬁre to burn.
The next day the hills rose still higher and steeper before them, and
they were forced to turn away northwards out of their course. Strider
seemed to be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out from
Weathertop, and their stock of provisions was beginning to run low.
It went on raining.
That night they camped on a stony shelf with a rock-wall behind
them, in which there was a shallow cave, a mere scoop in the cliff.
Frodo was restless. The cold and wet had made his wound more
painful than ever, and the ache and sense of deadly chill took away
all sleep. He lay tossing and turning and listening fearfully to the
stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks of rock, water dripping, a crack,
the sudden rattling fall of a loosened stone. He felt that black shapes
were advancing to smother him; but when he sat up he saw nothing
but the back of Strider sitting hunched up, smoking his pipe, and
watching. He lay down again and passed into an uneasy dream, in
which he walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire, but it seemed
faint and dim, less clear than the tall black shadows that stood looking
over the hedge.
In the morning he woke to ﬁnd that the rain had stopped. The
clouds were still thick, but they were breaking, and pale strips of blue
appeared between them. The wind was shifting again. They did not
start early. Immediately after their cold and comfortless breakfast
Strider went off alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

203

of the cliff, until he came back. He was going to climb up, if he
could, and get a look at the lie of the land.
When he returned he was not reassuring. ‘We have come too far
to the north,’ he said, ‘and we must ﬁnd some way to turn back
southwards again. If we keep on as we are going we shall get up into
the Ettendales far north of Rivendell. That is troll-country, and little
known to me. We could perhaps ﬁnd our way through and come
round to Rivendell from the north; but it would take too long, for I
do not know the way, and our food would not last. So somehow or
other we must ﬁnd the Ford of Bruinen.’
The rest of that day they spent scrambling over rocky ground.
They found a passage between two hills that led them into a valley
running south-east, the direction that they wished to take; but
towards the end of the day they found their road again barred by a
ridge of high land; its dark edge against the sky was broken into many
bare points like teeth of a blunted saw. They had a choice between
going back or climbing over it.
They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difﬁcult.
Before long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on
foot. Even so they often despaired of getting their pony up, or indeed
of ﬁnding a path for themselves, burdened as they were. The light
was nearly gone, and they were all exhausted, when at last they
reached the top. They had climbed on to a narrow saddle between
two higher points, and the land fell steeply away again, only a short
distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the ground
shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder felt as
if icy claws were laid upon them. The trees and rocks about him
seemed shadowy and dim.
‘We cannot go any further,’ said Merry to Strider. ‘I am afraid
this has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully anxious about
him. What are we to do? Do you think they will be able to cure him
in Rivendell, if we ever get there?’
‘We shall see,’ answered Strider. ‘There is nothing more that I
can do in the wilderness; and it is chieﬂy because of his wound that
I am so anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further
tonight.’
‘What is the matter with my master?’ asked Sam in a low voice,
looking appealingly at Strider. ‘His wound was small, and it is already
closed. There’s nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his
shoulder.’
‘Frodo has been touched by the weapons of the Enemy,’ said
Strider, ‘and there is some poison or evil at work that is beyond my
skill to drive out. But do not give up hope, Sam!’
*
*
*

204

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Night was cold up on the high ridge. They lit a small ﬁre down
under the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit:
it looked as if stone had once been quarried there. They sat huddled
together. The wind blew chill through the pass, and they heard the
tree-tops lower down moaning and sighing. Frodo lay half in a dream,
imagining that endless dark wings were sweeping by above him, and
that on the wings rode pursuers that sought him in all the hollows
of the hills.
The morning dawned bright and fair; the air was clean, and the
light pale and clear in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but they longed for the sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As
soon as it was light, Strider took Merry with him and went to survey
the country from the height to the east of the pass. The sun had risen
and was shining brightly when he returned with more comforting
news. They were now going more or less in the right direction. If
they went on, down the further side of the ridge, they would have
the Mountains on their left. Some way ahead Strider had caught a
glimpse of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was
hidden from view, the Road to the Ford was not far from the River
and lay on the side nearest to them.
‘We must make for the Road again,’ he said. ‘We cannot hope to
ﬁnd a path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the
Road is our only way to the Ford.’
As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed slowly
down the southern side of the ridge; but the way was much easier
than they had expected, for the slope was far less steep on this side,
and before long Frodo was able to ride again. Bill Ferny’s poor old
pony was developing an unexpected talent for picking out a path,
and for sparing its rider as many jolts as possible. The spirits of the
party rose again. Even Frodo felt better in the morning light, but
every now and again a mist seemed to obscure his sight, and he
passed his hands over his eyes.
Pippin was a little ahead of the others. Suddenly he turned round
and called to them. ‘There is a path here!’ he cried.
When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no
mistake: there were clearly the beginnings of a path, that climbed
with many windings out of the woods below and faded away on the
hill-top behind. In places it was now faint and overgrown, or choked
with fallen stones and trees; but at one time it seemed to have been
much used. It was a path made by strong arms and heavy feet. Here
and there old trees had been cut or broken down, and large rocks
cloven or heaved aside to make a way.
They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

205

easiest way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety
increased as they came into the dark woods, and the path grew plainer
and broader. Suddenly coming out of a belt of ﬁr-trees it ran steeply
down a slope, and turned sharply to the left round the corner of a
rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came to the corner they looked
round and saw that the path ran on over a level strip under the face
of a low cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall there was a door
hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge.
Outside the door they all halted. There was a cave or rock-chamber
behind, but in the gloom inside nothing could be seen. Strider, Sam,
and Merry pushing with all their strength managed to open the door
a little wider, and then Strider and Merry went in. They did not go
far, for on the ﬂoor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be
seen near the entrance except some great empty jars and broken pots.
‘Surely this is a troll-hole, if ever there was one!’ said Pippin.
‘Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know who made
the path – and we had better get off it quick.’
‘There is no need, I think,’ said Strider, coming out. ‘It is certainly
a troll-hole, but it seems to have been long forsaken. I don’t think
we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.’
The path went on again from the door, and turning to the right
again across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope.
Pippin, not liking to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on
ahead with Merry. Sam and Strider came behind, one on each side
of Frodo’s pony, for the path was now broad enough for four or ﬁve
hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone very far before
Pippin came running back, followed by Merry. They both looked
terriﬁed.
‘There are trolls!’ Pippin panted. ‘Down in a clearing in the woods
not far below. We got a sight of them through the tree-trunks. They
are very large!’
‘We will come and look at them,’ said Strider, picking up a stick.
Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared.
The sun was now high, and it shone down through the halfstripped branches of the trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches
of light. They halted suddenly on the edge, and peered through the
tree-trunks, holding their breath. There stood the trolls: three large
trolls. One was stooping, and the other two stood staring at him.
Strider walked forward unconcernedly. ‘Get up, old stone!’ he
said, and broke his stick upon the stooping troll.
Nothing happened. There was a gasp of astonishment from the
hobbits, and then even Frodo laughed. ‘Well!’ he said. ‘We are forgetting our family history! These must be the very three that were caught

206

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

by Gandalf, quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves
and one hobbit.’
‘I had no idea we were anywhere near the place!’ said Pippin. He
knew the story well. Bilbo and Frodo had told it often; but as a
matter of fact he had never more than half believed it. Even now he
looked at the stone trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic
might not suddenly bring them to life again.
‘You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever
knew about trolls,’ said Strider. ‘It is broad daylight with a bright
sun, and yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale of live
trolls waiting for us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed
that one of them has an old bird’s nest behind his ear. That would
be a most unusual ornament for a live troll!’
They all laughed. Frodo felt his spirits reviving: the reminder of
Bilbo’s ﬁrst successful adventure was heartening. The sun, too, was
warm and comforting, and the mist before his eyes seemed to be
lifting a little. They rested for some time in the glade, and took their
mid-day meal right under the shadow of the trolls’ large legs.
‘Won’t somebody give us a bit of a song, while the sun is high?’
said Merry, when they had ﬁnished. ‘We haven’t had a song or a tale
for days.’
‘Not since Weathertop,’ said Frodo. The others looked at him.
‘Don’t worry about me!’ he added. ‘I feel much better, but I don’t
think I could sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his
memory.’
‘Come on, Sam!’ said Merry. ‘There’s more stored in your head
than you let on about.’
‘I don’t know about that,’ said Sam. ‘But how would this suit? It
ain’t what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of
nonsense. But these old images here brought it to my mind.’ Standing
up, with his hands behind his back, as if he was at school, he began
to sing to an old tune.
Troll sat alone on his seat of stone,
And munched and mumbled a bare old bone;
For many a year he had gnawed it near,
For meat was hard to come by.
Done by! Gum by!
In a cave in the hills he dwelt alone,
And meat was hard to come by.
Up came Tom with his big boots on.
Said he to Troll: ‘Pray, what is yon?
For it looks like the shin o’ my nuncle Tim,

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

As should be a-lyin’ in graveyard.
Caveyard! Paveyard!
This many a year has Tim been gone,
And I thought he were lyin’ in graveyard.’
‘My lad,’ said Troll, ‘this bone I stole.
But what be bones that lie in a hole?
Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o’ lead,
Afore I found his shinbone.
Tinbone! Thinbone!
He can spare a share for a poor old troll,
For he don’t need his shinbone.’
Said Tom: ‘I don’t see why the likes o’ thee
Without axin’ leave should go makin’ free
With the shank or the shin o’ my father’s kin;
So hand the old bone over!
Rover! Trover!
Though dead he be, it belongs to he;
So hand the old bone over!’
‘For a couple o’ pins,’ says Troll, and grins,
‘I’ll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins.
A bit o’ fresh meat will go down sweet!
I’ll try my teeth on thee now.
Hee now! See now!
I’m tired o’ gnawing old bones and skins;
I’ve a mind to dine on thee now.’
But just as he thought his dinner was caught,
He found his hands had hold of naught.
Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind
And gave him the boot to larn him.
Warn him! Darn him!
A bump o’ the boot on the seat, Tom thought,
Would be the way to larn him.
But harder than stone is the ﬂesh and bone
Of a troll that sits in the hills alone.
As well set your boot to the mountain’s root,
For the seat of a troll don’t feel it.
Peel it! Heal it!
Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan,
And he knew his toes could feel it.

207

208

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Tom’s leg is game, since home he came,
And his bootless foot is lasting lame;
But Troll don’t care, and he’s still there
With the bone he boned from its owner.
Doner! Boner!
Troll’s old seat is still the same,
And the bone he boned from its owner!
‘Well, that’s a warning to us all!’ laughed Merry. ‘It is as well you
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!’
‘Where did you come by that, Sam?’ asked Pippin. ‘I’ve never
heard those words before.’
Sam muttered something inaudible. ‘It’s out of his own head, of
course,’ said Frodo. ‘I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this
journey. First he was a conspirator, now he’s a jester. He’ll end up
by becoming a wizard – or a warrior!’
‘I hope not,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t want to be neither!’
In the afternoon they went on down the woods. They were probably following the very track that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves
had used many years before. After a few miles they came out on the
top of a high bank above the Road. At this point the Road had left
the Hoarwell far behind in its narrow valley, and now clung close to
the feet of the hills, rolling and winding eastward among woods and
heather-covered slopes towards the Ford and the Mountains. Not
far down the bank Strider pointed out a stone in the grass. On it
roughly cut and now much weathered could still be seen dwarf-runes
and secret marks.
‘There!’ said Merry. ‘That must be the stone that marked the
place where the trolls’ gold was hidden. How much is left of Bilbo’s
share, I wonder, Frodo?’
Frodo looked at the stone, and wished that Bilbo had brought
home no treasure more perilous, nor less easy to part with. ‘None at
all,’ he said. ‘Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it
was really his, as it came from robbers.’
The Road lay quiet under the long shadows of early evening. There
was no sign of any other travellers to be seen. As there was now no
other possible course for them to take, they climbed down the bank,
and turning left went off as fast as they could. Soon a shoulder of
the hills cut off the light of the fast westering sun. A cold wind ﬂowed
down to meet them from the mountains ahead.
They were beginning to look out for a place off the Road, where
they could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that brought

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

209

sudden fear back into their hearts: the noise of hoofs behind them.
They looked back, but they could not see far because of the many
windings and rollings of the Road. As quickly as they could they
scrambled off the beaten way and up into the deep heather and
bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, until they came to a small
patch of thick-growing hazels. As they peered out from among the
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and grey in the failing light,
some thirty feet below them. The sound of hoofs drew nearer. They
were going fast, with a light clippety-clippety-clip. Then faintly, as if it
was blown away from them by the breeze, they seemed to catch a
dim ringing, as of small bells tinkling.
‘That does not sound like a Black Rider’s horse!’ said Frodo,
listening intently. The other hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not,
but they all remained full of suspicion. They had been in fear of
pursuit for so long that any sound from behind seemed ominous and
unfriendly. But Strider was now leaning forward, stooped to the
ground, with a hand to his ear, and a look of joy on his face.
The light faded, and the leaves on the bushes rustled softly. Clearer
and nearer now the bells jingled, and clippety-clip came the quick
trotting feet. Suddenly into view below came a white horse, gleaming
in the shadows, running swiftly. In the dusk its headstall ﬂickered
and ﬂashed, as if it were studded with gems like living stars. The
rider’s cloak streamed behind him, and his hood was thrown back;
his golden hair ﬂowed shimmering in the wind of his speed. To Frodo
it appeared that a white light was shining through the form and
raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil.
Strider sprang from hiding and dashed down towards the Road,
leaping with a cry through the heather; but even before he had moved
or called, the rider had reined in his horse and halted, looking up
towards the thicket where they stood. When he saw Strider, he dismounted and ran to meet him calling out: Ai na vedui Dúnadan! Mae
govannen! His speech and clear ringing voice left no doubt in their
hearts: the rider was of the Elven-folk. No others that dwelt in the
wide world had voices so fair to hear. But there seemed to be a note
of haste or fear in his call, and they saw that he was now speaking
quickly and urgently to Strider.
Soon Strider beckoned to them, and the hobbits left the bushes
and hurried down to the Road. ‘This is Glorﬁndel, who dwells in
the house of Elrond,’ said Strider.
‘Hail, and well met at last!’ said the Elf-lord to Frodo. ‘I was sent
from Rivendell to look for you. We feared that you were in danger
upon the road.’
‘Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?’ cried Frodo joyfully.
‘No. He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,’

210

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

answered Glorﬁndel. ‘Elrond received news that troubled him. Some
of my kindred, journeying in your land beyond the Baranduin,*
learned that things were amiss, and sent messages as swiftly as they
could. They said that the Nine were abroad, and that you were
astray bearing a great burden without guidance, for Gandalf had not
returned. There are few even in Rivendell that can ride openly against
the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond sent out north, west, and
south. It was thought that you might turn far aside to avoid pursuit,
and become lost in the Wilderness.
‘It was my lot to take the Road, and I came to the Bridge of
Mitheithel, and left a token there, nigh on seven days ago. Three of
the servants of Sauron were upon the Bridge, but they withdrew and
I pursued them westward. I came also upon two others, but they
turned away southward. Since then I have searched for your trail.
Two days ago I found it, and followed it over the Bridge; and today
I marked where you descended from the hills again. But come! There
is no time for further news. Since you are here we must risk the peril
of the Road and go. There are ﬁve behind us, and when they ﬁnd
your trail upon the Road they will ride after us like the wind. And
they are not all. Where the other four may be, I do not know. I fear
that we may ﬁnd the Ford is already held against us.’
While Glorﬁndel was speaking the shades of evening deepened.
Frodo felt a great weariness come over him. Ever since the sun began
to sink the mist before his eyes had darkened, and he felt that a
shadow was coming between him and the faces of his friends. Now
pain assailed him, and he felt cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam’s
arm.
‘My master is sick and wounded,’ said Sam angrily. ‘He can’t go
on riding after nightfall. He needs rest.’
Glorﬁndel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him
gently in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety.
Brieﬂy Strider told of the attack on their camp under Weathertop,
and of the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept,
and handed it to the Elf. Glorﬁndel shuddered as he took it, but he
looked intently at it.
‘There are evil things written on this hilt,’ he said; ‘though
maybe your eyes cannot see them. Keep it, Aragorn, till we reach
the house of Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may!
Alas! the wounds of this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will
do what I can – but all the more do I urge you now to go on without
rest.’
He searched the wound on Frodo’s shoulder with his ﬁngers, and
* The Brandywine River.

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

211

his face grew graver, as if what he learned disquieted him. But Frodo
felt the chill lessen in his side and arm; a little warmth crept down
from his shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The dusk
of evening seemed to grow lighter about him, as if a cloud had been
withdrawn. He saw his friends’ faces more clearly again, and a
measure of new hope and strength returned.
‘You shall ride my horse,’ said Glorﬁndel. ‘I will shorten the stirrups up to the saddle-skirts, and you must sit as tight as you can.
But you need not fear: my horse will not let any rider fall that I
command him to bear. His pace is light and smooth; and if danger
presses too near, he will bear you away with a speed that even the
black steeds of the enemy cannot rival.’
‘No, he will not!’ said Frodo. ‘I shall not ride him, if I am to be
carried off to Rivendell or anywhere else, leaving my friends behind
in danger.’
Glorﬁndel smiled. ‘I doubt very much,’ he said, ‘if your friends
would be in danger if you were not with them! The pursuit would
follow you and leave us in peace, I think. It is you, Frodo, and that
which you bear that brings us all in peril.’
To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount
Glorﬁndel’s white horse. The pony was laden instead with a great
part of the others’ burdens, so that they now marched lighter, and
for a time made good speed; but the hobbits began to ﬁnd it hard
to keep up with the swift tireless feet of the Elf. On he led them, into
the mouth of darkness, and still on under the deep clouded night.
There was neither star nor moon. Not until the grey of dawn did he
allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were by that time nearly
asleep on their stumbling legs; and even Strider seemed by the sag
of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark
dream.
They cast themselves down in the heather a few yards from the
road-side, and fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to have
closed their eyes when Glorﬁndel, who had set himself to watch while
they slept, awoke them again. The sun had now climbed far into the
morning, and the clouds and mists of the night were gone.
‘Drink this!’ said Glorﬁndel to them, pouring for each in turn a
little liquor from his silver-studded ﬂask of leather. It was clear as
spring water and had no taste, and it did not feel either cool or warm
in the mouth; but strength and vigour seemed to ﬂow into all their
limbs as they drank it. Eaten after that draught the stale bread and
dried fruit (which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy
their hunger better than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done.
*
*
*

212

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

They had rested rather less than ﬁve hours when they took to the
Road again. Glorﬁndel still urged them on, and only allowed two
brief halts during the day’s march. In this way they covered almost
twenty miles before nightfall, and came to a point where the Road
bent right and ran down towards the bottom of the valley, now
making straight for the Bruinen. So far there had been no sign or
sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or hear; but often
Glorﬁndel would halt and listen for a moment, if they lagged behind,
and a look of anxiety clouded his face. Once or twice he spoke to
Strider in the elf-tongue.
But however anxious their guides might be, it was plain that the
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along
dizzy with weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet
and legs. Frodo’s pain had redoubled, and during the day things
about him faded to shadows of ghostly grey. He almost welcomed
the coming of night, for then the world seemed less pale and empty.
The hobbits were still weary, when they set out again early next
morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the
Ford, and they hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage.
‘Our peril will be greatest just ere we reach the river,’ said Glorﬁndel; ‘for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind us,
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.’
The Road was still running steadily downhill, and there was now
in places much grass at either side, in which the hobbits walked when
they could, to ease their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came
to a place where the Road went suddenly under the dark shadow of
tall pine-trees, and then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist
walls of red stone. Echoes ran along as they hurried forward; and
there seemed to be a sound of many footfalls following their own.
All at once, as if through a gate of light, the Road ran out again from
the end of the tunnel into the open. There at the bottom of a sharp
incline they saw before them a long ﬂat mile, and beyond that the
Ford of Rivendell. On the further side was a steep brown bank,
threaded by a winding path; and behind that the tall mountains
climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the
fading sky.
There was still an echo as of following feet in the cutting behind
them; a rushing noise as if a wind were rising and pouring through
the branches of the pines. One moment Glorﬁndel turned and
listened, then he sprang forward with a loud cry.
‘Fly!’ he called. ‘Fly! The enemy is upon us!’
The white horse leaped forward. The hobbits ran down the slope.
Glorﬁndel and Strider followed as rearguard. They were only half

FLIGHT TO THE FORD

213

way across the ﬂat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of the gate in the trees that they had just left rode a Black
Rider. He reined his horse in, and halted, swaying in his saddle.
Another followed him, and then another; then again two more.
‘Ride forward! Ride!’ cried Glorﬁndel to Frodo.
He did not obey at once, for a strange reluctance seized him.
Checking the horse to a walk, he turned and looked back. The Riders
seemed to sit upon their great steeds like threatening statues upon a
hill, dark and solid, while all the woods and land about them receded
as if into a mist. Suddenly he knew in his heart that they were silently
commanding him to wait. Then at once fear and hatred awoke in
him. His hand left the bridle and gripped the hilt of his sword, and
with a red ﬂash he drew it.
‘Ride on! Ride on!’ cried Glorﬁndel, and then loud and clear he
called to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth!
At once the white horse sprang away and sped like the wind along
the last lap of the Road. At the same moment the black horses leaped
down the hill in pursuit, and from the Riders came a terrible cry,
such as Frodo had heard ﬁlling the woods with horror in the Eastfarthing far away. It was answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his
friends out from the trees and rocks away on the left four other Riders
came ﬂying. Two rode towards Frodo; two galloped madly towards
the Ford to cut off his escape. They seemed to him to run like the
wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as their courses converged
with his.
Frodo looked back for a moment over his shoulder. He could no
longer see his friends. The Riders behind were falling back: even
their great steeds were no match in speed for the white elf-horse of
Glorﬁndel. He looked forward again, and hope faded. There seemed
no chance of reaching the Ford before he was cut off by the others that
had lain in ambush. He could see them clearly now: they appeared to
have cast aside their hoods and black cloaks, and they were robed in
white and grey. Swords were naked in their pale hands; helms were
on their heads. Their cold eyes glittered, and they called to him with
fell voices.
Fear now ﬁlled all Frodo’s mind. He thought no longer of his
sword. No cry came from him. He shut his eyes and clung to the
horse’s mane. The wind whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the
harness rang wild and shrill. A breath of deadly cold pierced him like
a spear, as with a last spurt, like a ﬂash of white ﬁre, the elf-horse
speeding as if on wings, passed right before the face of the foremost
Rider.
Frodo heard the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt
the quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled

214

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

up the stony path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across
the Ford.
But the pursuers were close behind. At the top of the bank the
horse halted and turned about neighing ﬁercely. There were Nine
Riders at the water’s edge below, and Frodo’s spirit quailed before
the threat of their uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would
prevent them from crossing as easily as he had done; and he felt that
it was useless to try to escape over the long uncertain path from the
Ford to the edge of Rivendell, if once the Riders crossed. In any case
he felt that he was commanded urgently to halt. Hatred again stirred
in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse.
Suddenly the foremost Rider spurred his horse forward. It checked
at the water and reared up. With a great effort Frodo sat upright and
brandished his sword.
‘Go back!’ he cried. ‘Go back to the Land of Mordor, and follow
me no more!’ His voice sounded thin and shrill in his own ears. The
Riders halted, but Frodo had not the power of Bombadil. His enemies
laughed at him with a harsh and chilling laughter. ‘Come back! Come
back!’ they called. ‘To Mordor we will take you!’
‘Go back!’ he whispered.
‘The Ring! The Ring!’ they cried with deadly voices; and immediately their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed
closely by two others.
‘By Elbereth and Lúthien the Fair,’ said Frodo with a last effort,
lifting up his sword, ‘you shall have neither the Ring nor me!’
Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up
menacing in his stirrups, and raised up his hand. Frodo was stricken
dumb. He felt his tongue cleave to his mouth, and his heart labouring.
His sword broke and fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared
and snorted. The foremost of the black horses had almost set foot
upon the shore.
At that moment there came a roaring and a rushing: a noise of
loud waters rolling many stones. Dimly Frodo saw the river below
him rise, and down along its course there came a plumed cavalry of
waves. White ﬂames seemed to Frodo to ﬂicker on their crests, and
he half fancied that he saw amid the water white riders upon white
horses with frothing manes. The three Riders that were still in the midst
of the Ford were overwhelmed: they disappeared, buried suddenly
under angry foam. Those that were behind drew back in dismay.
With his last failing senses Frodo heard cries, and it seemed to
him that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a
shining ﬁgure of white light; and behind it ran small shadowy forms
waving ﬂames, that ﬂared red in the grey mist that was falling over
the world.

Chapter 1
MANY MEETINGS
Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At ﬁrst he thought that
he had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on
the edge of memory. Or perhaps he had been ill? But the ceiling
looked strange; it was ﬂat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He
lay a little while longer looking at patches of sunlight on the wall,
and listening to the sound of a waterfall.
‘Where am I, and what is the time?’ he said aloud to the ceiling.
‘In the house of Elrond, and it is ten o’clock in the morning,’ said
a voice. ‘It is the morning of October the twenty-fourth, if you want
to know.’
‘Gandalf !’ cried Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting
in a chair by the open window.
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘I am here. And you are lucky to be here, too, after
all the absurd things you have done since you left home.’
Frodo lay down again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to
argue, and in any case he did not think he would get the better of
an argument. He was fully awake now, and the memory of his
journey was returning: the disastrous ‘short cut’ through the Old
Forest; the ‘accident’ at The Prancing Pony; and his madness in putting on the Ring in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking
of all these things and trying in vain to bring his memory down to
his arriving in Rivendell, there was a long silence, broken only by the
soft puffs of Gandalf ’s pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the
window.
‘Where’s Sam?’ Frodo asked at length. ‘And are the others all
right?’
‘Yes, they are all safe and sound,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Sam was
here until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.’
‘What happened at the Ford?’ said Frodo. ‘It all seemed so dim,
somehow; and it still does.’
‘Yes, it would. You were beginning to fade,’ answered Gandalf.
‘The wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you
would have been beyond our aid. But you have some strength in you,
my dear hobbit! As you showed in the Barrow. That was touch and
go: perhaps the most dangerous moment of all. I wish you could
have held out at Weathertop.’
‘You seem to know a great deal already,’ said Frodo. ‘I have not
spoken to the others about the Barrow. At ﬁrst it was too horrible,

220

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and afterwards there were other things to think about. How do you
know about it?’
‘You have talked long in your sleep, Frodo,’ said Gandalf gently,
‘and it has not been hard for me to read your mind and memory.
Do not worry! Though I said ‘‘absurd’’ just now, I did not mean it.
I think well of you – and of the others. It is no small feat to have
come so far, and through such dangers, still bearing the Ring.’
‘We should never have done it without Strider,’ said Frodo. ‘But
we needed you. I did not know what to do without you.’
‘I was delayed,’ said Gandalf, ‘and that nearly proved our ruin.
And yet I am not sure: it may have been better so.’
‘I wish you would tell me what happened!’
‘All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about
anything today, by Elrond’s orders.’
‘But talking would stop me thinking and wondering, which are
quite as tiring,’ said Frodo. ‘I am wide awake now, and I remember
so many things that want explaining. Why were you delayed? You
ought to tell me that at least.’
‘You will soon hear all you wish to know,’ said Gandalf. ‘We shall
have a Council, as soon as you are well enough. At the moment I
will only say that I was held captive.’
‘You?’ cried Frodo.
‘Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,’ said the wizard solemnly. ‘There are
many powers in the world, for good or for evil. Some are greater
than I am. Against some I have not yet been measured. But my time
is coming. The Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth.
War is preparing!’
‘Then you knew of the Riders already – before I met them?’
‘Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the
Black Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of
the Rings. But I did not know that they had arisen again or I should
have ﬂed with you at once. I heard news of them only after I left you
in June; but that story must wait. For the moment we have been
saved from disaster, by Aragorn.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo, ‘it was Strider that saved us. Yet I was afraid
of him at ﬁrst. Sam never quite trusted him, I think, not at any rate
until we met Glorﬁndel.’
Gandalf smiled. ‘I have heard all about Sam,’ he said. ‘He has no
more doubts now.’
‘I am glad,’ said Frodo. ‘For I have become very fond of Strider.
Well, fond is not the right word. I mean he is dear to me; though he
is strange, and grim at times. In fact, he reminds me often of you. I
didn’t know that any of the Big People were like that. I thought,
well, that they were just big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like

MANY MEETINGS

223

have dwelt in the Blessed Realm live at once in both worlds, and
against both the Seen and the Unseen they have great power.’
‘I thought that I saw a white ﬁgure that shone and did not grow
dim like the others. Was that Glorﬁndel then?’
‘Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one
of the mighty of the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord of a house of princes.
Indeed there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of
Mordor, for a while: and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There
is power, too, of another kind in the Shire. But all such places will
soon become islands under siege, if things go on as they are going.
The Dark Lord is putting forth all his strength.
‘Still,’ he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin,
while his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, ‘we must
keep up our courage. You will soon be well, if I do not talk you to
death. You are in Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything
for the present.’
‘I haven’t any courage to keep up,’ said Frodo, ‘but I am not
worried at the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell me
the end of the affair at the Ford, as I keep on asking, and I shall be
content for the present. After that I shall have another sleep, I think;
but I shan’t be able to close my eyes until you have ﬁnished the story
for me.’
Gandalf moved his chair to the bedside and took a good look at
Frodo. The colour had come back to his face, and his eyes were
clear, and fully awake and aware. He was smiling, and there seemed
to be little wrong with him. But to the wizard’s eye there was a faint
change, just a hint as it were of transparency, about him, and especially about the left hand that lay outside upon the coverlet.
‘Still that must be expected,’ said Gandalf to himself. ‘He is not
half through yet, and to what he will come in the end not even Elrond
can foretell. Not to evil, I think. He may become like a glass ﬁlled
with a clear light for eyes to see that can.’
‘You look splendid,’ he said aloud. ‘I will risk a brief tale without
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must
sleep again. This is what happened, as far as I can gather. The Riders
made straight for you, as soon as you ﬂed. They did not need the
guidance of their horses any longer: you had become visible to them,
being already on the threshold of their world. And also the Ring drew
them. Your friends sprang aside, off the road, or they would have
been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save you, if the
white horse could not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, and
too many to oppose. On foot even Glorﬁndel and Aragorn together
could not withstand all the Nine at once.
‘When the Ringwraiths swept by, your friends ran up behind.

224

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Close to the Ford there is a small hollow beside the road masked by
a few stunted trees. There they hastily kindled ﬁre; for Glorﬁndel
knew that a ﬂood would come down, if the Riders tried to cross, and
then he would have to deal with any that were left on his side of the
river. The moment the ﬂood appeared, he rushed out, followed by
Aragorn and the others with ﬂaming brands. Caught between ﬁre
and water, and seeing an Elf-lord revealed in his wrath, they were
dismayed, and their horses were stricken with madness. Three were
carried away by the ﬁrst assault of the ﬂood; the others were now
hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.’
‘And is that the end of the Black Riders?’ asked Frodo.
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘Their horses must have perished, and without
them they are crippled. But the Ringwraiths themselves cannot be so
easily destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at
present. Your friends crossed after the ﬂood had passed and they found
you lying on your face at the top of the bank, with a broken sword under
you. The horse was standing guard beside you. You were pale and cold,
and they feared that you were dead, or worse. Elrond’s folk met them,
carrying you slowly towards Rivendell.’
‘Who made the ﬂood?’ asked Frodo.
‘Elrond commanded it,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The river of this valley
is under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need
to bar the Ford. As soon as the captain of the Ringwraiths rode into
the water the ﬂood was released. If I may say so, I added a few
touches of my own: you may not have noticed, but some of the waves
took the form of great white horses with shining white riders; and
there were many rolling and grinding boulders. For a moment I was
afraid that we had let loose too ﬁerce a wrath, and the ﬂood would
get out of hand and wash you all away. There is great vigour in the
waters that come down from the snows of the Misty Mountains.’
‘Yes, it all comes back to me now,’ said Frodo: ‘the tremendous
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends and enemies and
all. But now we are safe!’
Gandalf looked quickly at Frodo, but he had shut his eyes. ‘Yes,
you are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to celebrate the victory at the Ford of Bruinen, and you will
all be there in places of honour.’
‘Splendid!’ said Frodo. ‘It is wonderful that Elrond, and Glorﬁndel
and such great lords, not to mention Strider, should take so much
trouble and show me so much kindness.’
‘Well, there are many reasons why they should,’ said Gandalf,
smiling. ‘I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the
Ring-bearer. And you are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-ﬁnder.’
‘Dear Bilbo!’ said Frodo sleepily. ‘I wonder where he is. I wish he

MANY MEETINGS

225

was here and could hear all about it. It would have made him laugh.
The cow jumped over the Moon! And the poor old troll!’ With that
he fell fast asleep.
Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea.
That house was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, ‘a perfect house,
whether you like food or sleep or story-telling or singing, or just
sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all’. Merely
to be there was a cure for weariness, fear, and sadness.
As the evening drew on, Frodo woke up again, and he found that
he no longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food
and drink, and probably for singing and story-telling afterwards. He
got out of bed and discovered that his arm was already nearly as
useful again as it ever had been. He found laid ready clean garments
of green cloth that ﬁtted him excellently. Looking in a mirror he
was startled to see a much thinner reﬂection of himself than he
remembered: it looked remarkably like the young nephew of Bilbo
who used to go tramping with his uncle in the Shire; but the eyes
looked out at him thoughtfully.
‘Yes, you have seen a thing or two since you last peeped out of a
looking-glass,’ he said to his reﬂection. ‘But now for a merry meeting!’
He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune.
At that moment there was a knock on the door, and Sam came
in. He ran to Frodo and took his left hand, awkwardly and shyly. He
stroked it gently and then he blushed and turned hastily away.
‘Hullo, Sam!’ said Frodo.
‘It’s warm!’ said Sam. ‘Meaning your hand, Mr. Frodo. It has felt
so cold through the long nights. But glory and trumpets!’ he cried,
turning round again with shining eyes and dancing on the ﬂoor. ‘It’s
ﬁne to see you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come
and see if you were ready to come down, and I thought he was
joking.’
‘I am ready,’ said Frodo. ‘Let’s go and look for the rest of the
party!’
‘I can take you to them, sir,’ said Sam. ‘It’s a big house this, and
very peculiar. Always a bit more to discover, and no knowing what
you’ll ﬁnd round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves here, and Elves there!
Some like kings, terrible and splendid; and some as merry as children.
And the music and the singing – not that I have had the time or the
heart for much listening since we got here. But I’m getting to know
some of the ways of the place.’
‘I know what you have been doing, Sam,’ said Frodo, taking his
arm. ‘But you shall be merry tonight, and listen to your heart’s
content. Come on, guide me round the corners!’

226

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Sam led him along several passages and down many steps and out
into a high garden above the steep bank of the river. He found his
friends sitting in a porch on the side of the house looking east.
Shadows had fallen in the valley below, but there was still a light on
the faces of the mountains far above. The air was warm. The sound
of running and falling water was loud, and the evening was ﬁlled
with a faint scent of trees and ﬂowers, as if summer still lingered in
Elrond’s gardens.
‘Hurray!’ cried Pippin, springing up. ‘Here is our noble cousin!
Make way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!’
‘Hush!’ said Gandalf from the shadows at the back of the porch.
‘Evil things do not come into this valley; but all the same we should
not name them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master
of the Dark Tower of Mordor, whose power is again stretching out
over the world. We are sitting in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.’
‘Gandalf has been saying many cheerful things like that,’ said
Pippin. ‘He thinks I need keeping in order. But it seems impossible,
somehow, to feel gloomy or depressed in this place. I feel I could
sing, if I knew the right song for the occasion.’
‘I feel like singing myself,’ laughed Frodo. ‘Though at the moment
I feel more like eating and drinking.’
‘That will soon be cured,’ said Pippin. ‘You have shown your
usual cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.’
‘More than a meal! A feast!’ said Merry. ‘As soon as Gandalf
reported that you were recovered, the preparations began.’ He had
hardly ﬁnished speaking when they were summoned to the hall by
the ringing of many bells.
The hall of Elrond’s house was ﬁlled with folk: Elves for the most
part, though there were a few guests of other sorts. Elrond, as was
his custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the
dais; and next to him on the one side sat Glorﬁndel, on the other
side sat Gandalf.
Frodo looked at them in wonder; for he had never before seen
Elrond, of whom so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right
hand and his left, Glorﬁndel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought
he knew so well, were revealed as lords of dignity and power.
Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other two; but his long
white hair, his sweeping silver beard, and his broad shoulders, made
him look like some wise king of ancient legend. In his aged face under
great snowy brows his dark eyes were set like coals that could leap
suddenly into ﬁre.
Glorﬁndel was tall and straight; his hair was of shining gold, his
face fair and young and fearless and full of joy; his eyes were bright

MANY MEETINGS

227

and keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and in
his hand was strength.
The face of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in
it was written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful.
His hair was dark as the shadows of twilight, and upon it was set a
circlet of silver; his eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them
was a light like the light of stars. Venerable he seemed as a king
crowned with many winters, and yet hale as a tried warrior in the
fulness of his strength. He was the Lord of Rivendell and mighty
among both Elves and Men.
In the middle of the table, against the woven cloths upon the wall,
there was a chair under a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look
upon, and so like was she in form of womanhood to Elrond that
Frodo guessed that she was one of his close kindred. Young she was
and yet not so. The braids of her dark hair were touched by no frost;
her white arms and clear face were ﬂawless and smooth, and the light
of stars was in her bright eyes, grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly
she looked, and thought and knowledge were in her glance, as of one
who has known many things that the years bring. Above her brow
her head was covered with a cap of silver lace netted with small gems,
glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament save a
girdle of leaves wrought in silver.
So it was that Frodo saw her whom few mortals had yet seen;
Arwen, daughter of Elrond, in whom it was said that the likeness of
Lúthien had come on earth again; and she was called Undómiel, for
she was the Evenstar of her people. Long she had been in the land
of her mother’s kin, in Lórien beyond the mountains, and was but
lately returned to Rivendell to her father’s house. But her brothers,
Elladan and Elrohir, were out upon errantry; for they rode often far
aﬁeld with the Rangers of the North, forgetting never their mother’s
torment in the dens of the orcs.
Such loveliness in living thing Frodo had never seen before nor
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to ﬁnd
that he had a seat at Elrond’s table among all these folk so high and
fair. Though he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several
cushions, he felt very small, and rather out of place; but that feeling
quickly passed. The feast was merry and the food all that his hunger
could desire. It was some time before he looked about him again or
even turned to his neighbours.
He looked ﬁrst for his friends. Sam had begged to be allowed to
wait on his master, but had been told that for this time he was a
guest of honour. Frodo could see him now, sitting with Pippin and
Merry at the upper end of one of the side-tables close to the dais.
He could see no sign of Strider.

230

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Glóin looked at Frodo and smiled. ‘You were very fond of Bilbo
were you not?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ answered Frodo. ‘I would rather see him than all the towers
and palaces in the world.’
At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and
went down the hall, and the company followed them in due order.
The doors were thrown open, and they went across a wide passage
and through other doors, and came into a further hall. In it were no
tables, but a bright ﬁre was burning in a great hearth between the
carven pillars upon either side.
Frodo found himself walking with Gandalf. ‘This is the Hall of
Fire,’ said the wizard. ‘Here you will hear many songs and tales – if
you can keep awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty
and quiet, and people come here who wish for peace, and thought.
There is always a ﬁre here, all the year round, but there is little other
light.’
As Elrond entered and went towards the seat prepared for him,
Elvish minstrels began to make sweet music. Slowly the hall ﬁlled,
and Frodo looked with delight upon the many fair faces that were
gathered together; the golden ﬁrelight played upon them and shimmered in their hair. Suddenly he noticed, not far from the further
end of the ﬁre, a small dark ﬁgure seated on a stool with his back
propped against a pillar. Beside him on the ground was a drinking-cup
and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was ill (if people were
ever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable to come to the feast. His
head seemed sunk in sleep on his breast, and a fold of his dark cloak
was drawn over his face.
Elrond went forward and stood beside the silent ﬁgure. ‘Awake,
little master!’ he said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he
beckoned to him. ‘Now at last the hour has come that you have
wished for, Frodo,’ he said. ‘Here is a friend that you have long
missed.’
The dark ﬁgure raised its head and uncovered its face.
‘Bilbo!’ cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang
forward.
‘Hullo, Frodo my lad!’ said Bilbo. ‘So you have got here at last.
I hoped you would manage it. Well, well! So all this feasting is in
your honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself ?’
‘Why weren’t you there?’ cried Frodo. ‘And why haven’t I been
allowed to see you before?’
‘Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have
sat by your side with Sam each day. But as for the feast, I don’t go
in for such things much now. And I had something else to do.’

MANY MEETINGS

231

‘What were you doing?’
‘Why, sitting and thinking. I do a lot of that nowadays, and this
is the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!’ he said,
cocking an eye at Elrond. There was a bright twinkle in it and no
sign of sleepiness that Frodo could see. ‘Wake up! I was not asleep,
Master Elrond. If you want to know, you have all come out from
your feast too soon, and you have disturbed me – in the middle of
making up a song. I was stuck over a line or two, and was thinking
about them; but now I don’t suppose I shall ever get them right.
There will be such a deal of singing that the ideas will be driven clean
out of my head. I shall have to get my friend the Dúnadan to help
me. Where is he?’
Elrond laughed. ‘He shall be found,’ he said. ‘Then you two shall
go into a corner and ﬁnish your task, and we will hear it and judge
it before we end our merrymaking.’ Messengers were sent to ﬁnd
Bilbo’s friend, though none knew where he was, or why he had not
been present at the feast.
In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came
quickly and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft
voices, oblivious of the mirth and music in the hall about them.
Bilbo had not much to say of himself. When he had left Hobbiton
he had wandered off aimlessly, along the Road or in the country
on either side; but somehow he had steered all the time towards
Rivendell.
‘I got here without much adventure,’ he said, ‘and after a rest I
went on with the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan’t travel
again. Old Balin had gone away. Then I came back here, and here
I have been. I have done this and that. I have written some more of
my book. And, of course, I make up a few songs. They sing them
occasionally: just to please me, I think; for, of course, they aren’t
really good enough for Rivendell. And I listen and I think. Time
doesn’t seem to pass here: it just is. A remarkable place altogether.
‘I hear all kinds of news, from over the Mountains, and out of the
South, but hardly anything from the Shire. I heard about the Ring,
of course. Gandalf has been here often. Not that he has told me a
great deal, he has become closer than ever these last few years. The
Dúnadan has told me more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a
disturbance! It is a pity that Gandalf did not ﬁnd out more sooner.
I could have brought the thing here myself long ago without so much
trouble. I have thought several times of going back to Hobbiton for
it; but I am getting old, and they would not let me: Gandalf and
Elrond, I mean. They seemed to think that the Enemy was looking
high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught
me tottering about in the Wild.

MANY MEETINGS

233

‘And why do you call him Dúnadan?’ asked Frodo.
‘The Dúnadan,’ said Bilbo. ‘He is often called that here. But I
thought you knew enough Elvish at least to know dún-adan: Man of
the West, Númenórean. But this is not the time for lessons!’ He
turned to Strider. ‘Where have you been, my friend? Why weren’t
you at the feast? The Lady Arwen was there.’
Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. ‘I know,’ he said. ‘But often
I must put mirth aside. Elladan and Elrohir have returned out of the
Wild unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at
once.’
‘Well, my dear fellow,’ said Bilbo, ‘now you’ve heard the news,
can’t you spare me a moment? I want your help in something urgent.
Elrond says this song of mine is to be ﬁnished before the end of
the evening, and I am stuck. Let’s go off into a corner and polish it
up!’
Strider smiled. ‘Come then!’ he said. ‘Let me hear it!’
Frodo was left to himself for a while, for Sam had fallen asleep.
He was alone and felt rather forlorn, although all about him the folk
of Rivendell were gathered. But those near him were silent, intent
upon the music of the voices and the instruments, and they gave no
heed to anything else. Frodo began to listen.
At ﬁrst the beauty of the melodies and of the interwoven words
in elven-tongues, even though he understood them little, held him
in a spell, as soon as he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed
that the words took shape, and visions of far lands and bright things
that he had never yet imagined opened out before him; and the ﬁrelit
hall became like a golden mist above seas of foam that sighed upon
the margins of the world. Then the enchantment became more and
more dreamlike, until he felt that an endless river of swelling gold
and silver was ﬂowing over him, too multitudinous for its pattern to
be comprehended; it became part of the throbbing air about him,
and it drenched and drowned him. Swiftly he sank under its shining
weight into a deep realm of sleep.
There he wandered long in a dream of music that turned into
running water, and then suddenly into a voice. It seemed to be the
voice of Bilbo chanting verses. Faint at ﬁrst and then clearer ran the
words.
Eärendil was a mariner
that tarried in Arvernien;
he built a boat of timber felled
in Nimbrethil to journey in;

MANY MEETINGS

237

‘Now we had better have it again,’ said an Elf.
Bilbo got up and bowed. ‘I am ﬂattered, Lindir,’ he said. ‘But it
would be too tiring to repeat it all.’
‘Not too tiring for you,’ the Elves answered laughing. ‘You know
you are never tired of reciting your own verses. But really we cannot
answer your question at one hearing!’
‘What!’ cried Bilbo. ‘You can’t tell which parts were mine, and
which were the Dúnadan’s?’
‘It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals,’
said the Elf.
‘Nonsense, Lindir,’ snorted Bilbo. ‘If you can’t distinguish between a Man and a Hobbit, your judgement is poorer than I imagined.
They’re as different as peas and apples.’
‘Maybe. To sheep other sheep no doubt appear different,’ laughed
Lindir. ‘Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We
have other business.’
‘I won’t argue with you,’ said Bilbo. ‘I am sleepy after so much
music and singing. I’ll leave you to guess, if you want to.’
He got up and came towards Frodo. ‘Well, that’s over,’ he said
in a low voice. ‘It went off better than I expected. I don’t often get
asked for a second hearing. What did you think of it?’
‘I am not going to try and guess,’ said Frodo smiling.
‘You needn’t,’ said Bilbo. ‘As a matter of fact it was all mine.
Except that Aragorn insisted on my putting in a green stone. He
seemed to think it important. I don’t know why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing rather above my head, and he said
that if I had the cheek to make verses about Eärendil in the house
of Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was right.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It seemed to me to ﬁt somehow,
though I can’t explain. I was half asleep when you began, and it
seemed to follow on from something that I was dreaming about. I
didn’t understand that it was really you speaking until near the end.’
‘It is difﬁcult to keep awake here, until you get used to it,’ said
Bilbo. ‘Not that hobbits would ever acquire quite the Elvish appetite
for music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as
food, or more. They will be going on for a long time yet. What do
you say to slipping off for some more quiet talk?’
‘Can we?’ said Frodo.
‘Of course. This is merrymaking not business. Come and go as
you like, as long as you don’t make a noise.’
They got up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made
for the doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a smile on
his face. In spite of his delight in Bilbo’s company Frodo felt a tug

238

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

of regret as they passed out of the Hall of Fire. Even as they stepped
over the threshold a single clear voice rose in song.
A Elbereth Gilthoniel,
silivren penna mı́riel
o menel aglar elenath!
Na-chaered palan-dı́riel
o galadhremmin ennorath,
Fanuilos, le linnathon
nef aear, sı́ nef aearon!
Frodo halted for a moment, looking back. Elrond was in his chair
and the ﬁre was on his face like summer-light upon the trees. Near
him sat the Lady Arwen. To his surprise Frodo saw that Aragorn
stood beside her; his dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed to
be clad in elven-mail, and a star shone on his breast. They spoke
together, and then suddenly it seemed to Frodo that Arwen turned
towards him, and the light of her eyes fell on him from afar and
pierced his heart.
He stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the Elvish
song fell like clear jewels of blended word and melody. ‘It is a song
to Elbereth,’ said Bilbo. ‘They will sing that, and other songs of the
Blessed Realm, many times tonight. Come on!’
He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the
gardens and looked south across the ravine of the Bruinen. There
they sat for some while, looking through the window at the bright
stars above the steep-climbing woods, and talking softly. They spoke
no more of the small news of the Shire far away, nor of the dark
shadows and perils that encompassed them, but of the fair things
they had seen in the world together, of the Elves, of the stars, of
trees, and the gentle fall of the bright year in the woods.
At last there came a knock on the door. ‘Begging your pardon,’
said Sam, putting in his head, ‘but I was just wondering if you would
be wanting anything.’
‘And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,’ replied Bilbo. ‘I guess you
mean that it is time your master went to bed.’
‘Well, sir, there is a Council early tomorrow, I hear, and he only
got up today for the ﬁrst time.’
‘Quite right, Sam,’ laughed Bilbo. ‘You can trot off and tell Gandalf
that he has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it has been
good to see you again! There are no folk like hobbits after all for a real
good talk. I am getting very old, and I began to wonder if I should live
to see your chapters of our story. Good night! I’ll take a walk, I think,
and look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!’

Chapter 2
THE COUNCIL OF ELROND
Next day Frodo woke early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked
along the terraces above the loud-ﬂowing Bruinen and watched the
pale, cool sun rise above the far mountains, and shine down, slanting
through the thin silver mist; the dew upon the yellow leaves was
glimmering, and the woven nets of gossamer twinkled on every bush.
Sam walked beside him, saying nothing, but snifﬁng the air, and
looking every now and again with wonder in his eyes at the great
heights in the East. The snow was white upon their peaks.
On a seat cut in the stone beside a turn in the path they came
upon Gandalf and Bilbo deep in talk. ‘Hullo! Good morning!’ said
Bilbo. ‘Feel ready for the great council?’
‘I feel ready for anything,’ answered Frodo. ‘But most of all I
should like to go walking today and explore the valley. I should like
to get into those pine-woods up there.’ He pointed away far up the
side of Rivendell to the north.
‘You may have a chance later,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we cannot make
any plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.’
Suddenly as they were talking a single clear bell rang out. ‘That
is the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,’ cried Gandalf. ‘Come
along now! Both you and Bilbo are wanted.’
Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding
path back to the house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment
forgotten, trotted Sam.
Gandalf led them to the porch where Frodo had found his friends
the evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now
glowing in the valley. The noise of bubbling waters came up from
the foaming river-bed. Birds were singing, and a wholesome peace
lay on the land. To Frodo his dangerous ﬂight, and the rumours of
the darkness growing in the world outside, already seemed only the
memories of a troubled dream; but the faces that were turned to
meet them as they entered were grave.
Elrond was there, and several others were seated in silence about
him. Frodo saw Glorﬁndel and Glóin; and in a corner alone Strider
was sitting, clad in his old travel-worn clothes again. Elrond drew
Frodo to a seat by his side, and presented him to the company,
saying:
‘Here, my friends, is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have

THE COUNCIL OF ELROND

271

Hador, and Húrin, and Túrin, and Beren himself were assembled
together, your seat should be among them.’
‘But you won’t send him off alone surely, Master?’ cried Sam,
unable to contain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner
where he had been quietly sitting on the ﬂoor.
‘No indeed!’ said Elrond, turning towards him with a smile. ‘You
at least shall go with him. It is hardly possible to separate you from
him, even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.’
Sam sat down, blushing and muttering. ‘A nice pickle we have
landed ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, shaking his head.

Chapter 3
THE RING GOES SOUTH
Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo’s
room. Merry and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam
had crept into the Council, and had been chosen as Frodo’s companion.
‘It’s most unfair,’ said Pippin. ‘Instead of throwing him out, and
clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!’
‘Rewards!’ said Frodo. ‘I can’t imagine a more severe punishment.
You are not thinking what you are saying: condemned to go on this
hopeless journey, a reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my task was
done, and I could rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.’
‘I don’t wonder,’ said Merry, ‘and I wish you could. But we are
envying Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be a punishment
for any of us to be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have come a
long way with you and been through some stiff times. We want to
go on.’
‘That’s what I meant,’ said Pippin. ‘We hobbits ought to stick
together, and we will. I shall go, unless they chain me up. There
must be someone with intelligence in the party.’
‘Then you certainly will not be chosen, Peregrin Took!’ said
Gandalf, looking in through the window, which was near the ground.
‘But you are all worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided
yet.’
‘Nothing decided!’ cried Pippin. ‘Then what were you all doing?
You were shut up for hours.’
‘Talking,’ said Bilbo. ‘There was a deal of talk, and everyone had
an eye-opener. Even old Gandalf. I think Legolas’s bit of news about
Gollum caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.’
‘You were wrong,’ said Gandalf. ‘You were inattentive. I had
already heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real
eye-openers, as you put it, were you and Frodo; and I was the only
one that was not surprised.’
‘Well, anyway,’ said Bilbo, ‘nothing was decided beyond choosing
poor Frodo and Sam. I was afraid all the time that it might come to
that, if I was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair
number, when the reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf ?’
‘Yes,’ said the wizard. ‘Some of the scouts have been sent out
already. More will go tomorrow. Elrond is sending Elves, and they
will get in touch with the Rangers, and maybe with Thranduil’s folk

THE RING GOES SOUTH

273

in Mirkwood. And Aragorn has gone with Elrond’s sons. We shall
have to scour the lands all round for many long leagues before any
move is made. So cheer up, Frodo! You will probably make quite a
long stay here.’
‘Ah!’ said Sam gloomily. ‘We’ll just wait long enough for winter
to come.’
‘That can’t be helped,’ said Bilbo. ‘It’s your fault partly, Frodo my
lad: insisting on waiting for my birthday. A funny way of honouring it,
I can’t help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting
the S.-B.s into Bag End. But there it is: you can’t wait now till spring;
and you can’t go till the reports come back.
When winter ﬁrst begins to bite
and stones crack in the frosty night,
when pools are black and trees are bare,
’tis evil in the Wild to fare.
But that I am afraid will be just your luck.’
‘I am afraid it will,’ said Gandalf. ‘We can’t start until we have
found out about the Riders.’
‘I thought they were all destroyed in the ﬂood,’ said Merry.
‘You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,’ said Gandalf. ‘The
power of their master is in them, and they stand or fall by him. We
hope that they were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made for a
while less dangerous; but we must ﬁnd out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your troubles, Frodo. I do not know
if I can do anything to help you; but I will whisper this in your ears.
Someone said that intelligence would be needed in the party. He was
right. I think I shall come with you.’
So great was Frodo’s delight at this announcement that Gandalf
left the window-sill, where he had been sitting, and took off his hat
and bowed. ‘I only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything
yet. In this matter Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the
Strider. Which reminds me, I want to see Elrond. I must be off.’
‘How long do you think I shall have here?’ said Frodo to Bilbo
when Gandalf had gone.
‘Oh, I don’t know. I can’t count days in Rivendell,’ said Bilbo.
‘But quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What
about helping me with my book, and making a start on the next?
Have you thought of an ending?’
‘Yes, several, and all are dark and unpleasant,’ said Frodo.
‘Oh, that won’t do!’ said Bilbo. ‘Books ought to have good endings.
How would this do: and they all settled down and lived together happily
ever after?’

274

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘It will do well, if it ever comes to that,’ said Frodo.
‘Ah!’ said Sam. ‘And where will they live? That’s what I often
wonder.’
For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the past
journey and of the perils that lay ahead; but such was the virtue of
the land of Rivendell that soon all fear and anxiety was lifted from
their minds. The future, good or ill, was not forgotten, but ceased
to have any power over the present. Health and hope grew strong in
them, and they were content with each good day as it came, taking
pleasure in every meal, and in every word and song.
So the days slipped away, as each morning dawned bright and
fair, and each evening followed cool and clear. But autumn was
waning fast; slowly the golden light faded to pale silver, and the
lingering leaves fell from the naked trees. A wind began to blow chill
from the Misty Mountains to the east. The Hunter’s Moon waxed
round in the night sky, and put to ﬂight all the lesser stars. But low
in the South one star shone red. Every night, as the Moon waned
again, it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it from his
window, deep in the heavens, burning like a watchful eye that glared
above the trees on the brink of the valley.
The hobbits had been nearly two months in the house of Elrond,
and November had gone by with the last shreds of autumn, and
December was passing, when the scouts began to return. Some had
gone north beyond the springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors;
and others had gone west, and with the help of Aragorn and the
Rangers had searched the lands far down the Greyﬂood, as far as
Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed the river by a ruined
town. Many had gone east and south; and some of these had crossed
the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbed the
pass at the sources of the Gladden River, and had come down into
Wilderland and over the Gladden Fields and so at length had reached
the old home of Radagast at Rhosgobel. Radagast was not there; and
they had returned over the high pass that was called the Redhorn
Gate. The sons of Elrond, Elladan and Elrohir, were the last to
return; they had made a great journey, passing down the Silverlode
into a strange country, but of their errand they would not speak to
any save to Elrond.
In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings
of the Riders or other servants of the Enemy. Even from the Eagles
of the Misty Mountains they had learned no fresh news. Nothing
had been seen or heard of Gollum; but the wild wolves were still
gathering, and were hunting again far up the Great River. Three of

THE RING GOES SOUTH

275

the black horses had been found at once drowned in the ﬂooded
Ford. On the rocks of the rapids below it searchers discovered the
bodies of ﬁve more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and tattered.
Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the
North.
‘Eight out of the Nine are accounted for at least,’ said Gandalf.
‘It is rash to be too sure, yet I think that we may hope now that the
Ringwraiths were scattered, and have been obliged to return as best
they could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.
‘If that is so, it will be some time before they can begin the hunt
again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to
journey all the way to the borders of Rivendell before they can pick
up our trail. And if we are careful that will be hard to ﬁnd. But we
must delay no longer.’
Elrond summoned the hobbits to him. He looked gravely at Frodo.
‘The time has come,’ he said. ‘If the Ring is to set out, it must go
soon. But those who go with it must not count on their errand being
aided by war or force. They must pass into the domain of the Enemy
far from aid. Do you still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be
the Ring-bearer?’
‘I do,’ said Frodo. ‘I will go with Sam.’
‘Then I cannot help you much, not even with counsel,’ said
Elrond. ‘I can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is
to be achieved I do not know. The Shadow has crept now to the feet
of the Mountains, and draws nigh even to the borders of the Greyﬂood; and under the Shadow all is dark to me. You will meet many
foes, some open, and some disguised; and you may ﬁnd friends upon
your way when you least look for it. I will send out messages, such
as I can contrive, to those whom I know in the wide world; but so
perilous are the lands now become that some may well miscarry, or
come no quicker than you yourself.
‘And I will choose you companions to go with you, as far as
they will or fortune allows. The number must be few, since your
hope is in speed and secrecy. Had I a host of Elves in armour of
the Elder Days, it would avail little, save to arouse the power of
Mordor.
‘The Company of the Ring shall be Nine; and the Nine Walkers
shall be set against the Nine Riders that are evil. With you and your
faithful servant, Gandalf will go; for this shall be his great task, and
maybe the end of his labours.
‘For the rest, they shall represent the other Free Peoples of the
World: Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Legolas shall be for the Elves; and

276

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gimli son of Glóin for the Dwarves. They are willing to go at least
to the passes of the Mountains, and maybe beyond. For men you
shall have Aragorn son of Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns
him closely.’
‘Strider!’ cried Frodo.
‘Yes,’ he said with a smile. ‘I ask leave once again to be your
companion, Frodo.’
‘I would have begged you to come,’ said Frodo, ‘only I thought
you were going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.’
‘I am,’ said Aragorn. ‘And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be
re-forged ere I set out to war. But your road and our road lie together
for many hundreds of miles. Therefore Boromir will also be in the
Company. He is a valiant man.’
‘There remain two more to be found,’ said Elrond. ‘These I will
consider. Of my household I may ﬁnd some that it seems good to
me to send.’
‘But that will leave no place for us!’ cried Pippin in dismay. ‘We
don’t want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.’
‘That is because you do not understand and cannot imagine what
lies ahead,’ said Elrond.
‘Neither does Frodo,’ said Gandalf, unexpectedly supporting
Pippin. ‘Nor do any of us see clearly. It is true that if these hobbits
understood the danger, they would not dare to go. But they would
still wish to go, or wish that they dared, and be shamed and unhappy. I think, Elrond, that in this matter it would be well to trust
rather to their friendship than to great wisdom. Even if you chose
for us an Elf-lord, such as Glorﬁndel, he could not storm the
Dark Tower, nor open the road to the Fire by the power that is in
him.’
‘You speak gravely,’ said Elrond, ‘but I am in doubt. The Shire,
I forebode, is not free now from peril; and these two I had thought
to send back there as messengers, to do what they could, according
to the fashion of their country, to warn the people of their danger.
In any case, I judge that the younger of these two, Peregrin Took,
should remain. My heart is against his going.’
‘Then, Master Elrond, you will have to lock me in prison, or send
me home tied in a sack,’ said Pippin. ‘For otherwise I shall follow
the Company.’
‘Let it be so then. You shall go,’ said Elrond, and he sighed. ‘Now
the tale of Nine is ﬁlled. In seven days the Company must depart.’
The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on
its blade was traced a device of seven stars set between the crescent
Moon and the rayed Sun, and about them was written many runes;

THE RING GOES SOUTH

277

for Aragorn son of Arathorn was going to war upon the marches of
Mordor. Very bright was that sword when it was made whole again;
the light of the sun shone redly in it, and the light of the moon shone
cold, and its edge was hard and keen. And Aragorn gave it a new
name and called it Andúril, Flame of the West.
Aragorn and Gandalf walked together or sat speaking of their road
and the perils they would meet; and they pondered the storied and
ﬁgured maps and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond.
Sometimes Frodo was with them; but he was content to lean on their
guidance, and he spent as much time as he could with Bilbo.
In those last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the
Hall of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the
lay of Beren and Lúthien and the winning of the Great Jewel; but in
the day, while Merry and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and
Sam were to be found with Bilbo in his own small room. Then
Bilbo would read passages from his book (which still seemed very
incomplete), or scraps of his verses, or would take notes of Frodo’s
adventures.
On the morning of the last day Frodo was alone with Bilbo, and
the old hobbit pulled out from under his bed a wooden box. He lifted
the lid and fumbled inside.
‘Here is your sword,’ he said. ‘But it was broken, you know. I
took it to keep it safe but I’ve forgotten to ask if the smiths could
mend it. No time now. So I thought, perhaps, you would care to
have this, don’t you know?’
He took from the box a small sword in an old shabby leathern
scabbard. Then he drew it, and its polished and well-tended blade
glittered suddenly, cold and bright. ‘This is Sting,’ he said, and thrust
it with little effort deep into a wooden beam. ‘Take it, if you like.
I shan’t want it again, I expect.’
Frodo accepted it gratefully.
‘Also there is this!’ said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed
to be rather heavy for its size. He unwound several folds of old cloth,
and held up a small shirt of mail. It was close-woven of many rings,
as supple almost as linen, cold as ice, and harder than steel. It shone
like moonlit silver, and was studded with white gems. With it was a
belt of pearl and crystal.
‘It’s a pretty thing, isn’t it?’ said Bilbo, moving it in the light. ‘And
useful. It is my dwarf-mail that Thorin gave me. I got it back from
Michel Delving before I started, and packed it with my luggage. I
brought all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, except the
Ring. But I did not expect to use this, and I don’t need it now, except
to look at sometimes. You hardly feel any weight when you put
it on.’

278

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I should look – well, I don’t think I should look right in it,’ said
Frodo.
‘Just what I said myself,’ said Bilbo. ‘But never mind about looks.
You can wear it under your outer clothes. Come on! You must share
this secret with me. Don’t tell anybody else! But I should feel happier
if I knew you were wearing it. I have a fancy it would turn even the
knives of the Black Riders,’ he ended in a low voice.
‘Very well, I will take it,’ said Frodo. Bilbo put it on him, and
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the
top his old weather-stained breeches, tunic, and jacket.
‘Just a plain hobbit you look,’ said Bilbo. ‘But there is more about
you now than appears on the surface. Good luck to you!’ He turned
away and looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune.
‘I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo, for this, and for all your
past kindnesses,’ said Frodo.
‘Don’t try!’ said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping him
on the back. ‘Ow!’ he cried. ‘You are too hard now to slap! But there
you are: Hobbits must stick together, and especially Bagginses. All I
ask in return is: take as much care of yourself as you can, and bring
back all the news you can, and any old songs and tales you can come
by. I’ll do my best to ﬁnish my book before you return. I should like
to write the second book, if I am spared.’ He broke off and turned
to the window again, singing softly.
I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of all that I have seen,
of meadow-ﬂowers and butterﬂies
in summers that have been;
Of yellow leaves and gossamer
in autumns that there were,
with morning mist and silver sun
and wind upon my hair.
I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of how the world will be
when winter comes without a spring
that I shall ever see.
For still there are so many things
that I have never seen:
in every wood in every spring
there is a different green.

THE RING GOES SOUTH

279

I sit beside the ﬁre and think
of people long ago,
and people who will see a world
that I shall never know.
But all the while I sit and think
of times there were before,
I listen for returning feet
and voices at the door.
It was a cold grey day near the end of December. The East Wind
was streaming through the bare branches of the trees, and seething
in the dark pines on the hills. Ragged clouds were hurrying overhead,
dark and low. As the cheerless shadows of the early evening began
to fall the Company made ready to set out. They were to start at
dusk, for Elrond counselled them to journey under cover of night as
often as they could, until they were far from Rivendell.
‘You should fear the many eyes of the servants of Sauron,’ he said.
‘I do not doubt that news of the discomﬁture of the Riders has already
reached him, and he will be ﬁlled with wrath. Soon now his spies on
foot and wing will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the sky
above you must beware as you go on your way.’
The Company took little gear of war, for their hope was in secrecy
not in battle. Aragorn had Andúril but no other weapon, and he went
forth clad only in rusty green and brown, as a Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a long sword, in fashion like Andúril but of less
lineage, and he bore also a shield and his war-horn.
‘Loud and clear it sounds in the valleys of the hills,’ he said, ‘and
then let all the foes of Gondor ﬂee!’ Putting it to his lips he blew a
blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that
voice in Rivendell sprang to their feet.
‘Slow should you be to wind that horn again, Boromir,’ said
Elrond, ‘until you stand once more on the borders of your land, and
dire need is on you.’
‘Maybe,’ said Boromir. ‘But always I have let my horn cry at
setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I
will not go forth as a thief in the night.’
Gimli the dwarf alone wore openly a short shirt of steel-rings, for
dwarves make light of burdens; and in his belt was a broad-bladed
axe. Legolas had a bow and a quiver, and at his belt a long white
knife. The younger hobbits wore the swords that they had taken from
the barrow; but Frodo took only Sting; and his mail-coat, as Bilbo
wished, remained hidden. Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side

280

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was the elven-sword Glamdring, the mate of Orcrist that lay now
upon the breast of Thorin under the Lonely Mountain.
All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and
they had jackets and cloaks lined with fur. Spare food and clothes
and blankets and other needs were laden on a pony, none other than
the poor beast that they had brought from Bree.
The stay in Rivendell had worked a great wonder of change on
him: he was glossy and seemed to have the vigour of youth. It was
Sam who had insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he
called him) would pine, if he did not come.
‘That animal can nearly talk,’ he said, ‘and would talk, if he stayed
here much longer. He gave me a look as plain as Mr. Pippin could
speak it: if you don’t let me go with you, Sam, I’ll follow on my
own.’ So Bill was going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only
member of the Company that did not seem depressed.
Their farewells had been said in the great hall by the ﬁre, and they
were only waiting now for Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the
house. A gleam of ﬁrelight came from the open doors, and soft lights
were glowing in many windows. Bilbo huddled in a cloak stood silent
on the doorstep beside Frodo. Aragorn sat with his head bowed to
his knees; only Elrond knew fully what this hour meant to him. The
others could be seen as grey shapes in the darkness.
Sam was standing by the pony, sucking his teeth, and staring
moodily into the gloom where the river roared stonily below; his
desire for adventure was at its lowest ebb.
‘Bill, my lad,’ he said, ‘you oughtn’t to have took up with us. You
could have stayed here and et the best hay till the new grass comes.’
Bill swished his tail and said nothing.
Sam eased the pack on his shoulders, and went over anxiously in
his mind all the things that he had stowed in it, wondering if he had
forgotten anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the little
box of salt that he always carried and reﬁlled when he could; a good
supply of pipe-weed (but not near enough, I’ll warrant); ﬂint and
tinder; woollen hose; linen; various small belongings of his master’s
that Frodo had forgotten and Sam had stowed to bring them out in
triumph when they were called for. He went through them all.
‘Rope!’ he muttered. ‘No rope! And only last night you said to
yourself: ‘‘Sam, what about a bit of rope? You’ll want it, if you haven’t
got it.’’ Well, I’ll want it. I can’t get it now.’
At that moment Elrond came out with Gandalf, and he called the
Company to him. ‘This is my last word,’ he said in a low voice. ‘The
Ring-bearer is setting out on the Quest of Mount Doom. On him

THE RING GOES SOUTH

281

alone is any charge laid: neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver
it to any servant of the Enemy nor indeed to let any handle it, save
members of the Company and the Council, and only then in gravest
need. The others go with him as free companions, to help him on
his way. You may tarry, or come back, or turn aside into other paths,
as chance allows. The further you go, the less easy will it be to
withdraw; yet no oath or bond is laid on you to go further than you
will. For you do not yet know the strength of your hearts, and you
cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.’
‘Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,’ said
Gimli.
‘Maybe,’ said Elrond, ‘but let him not vow to walk in the dark,
who has not seen the nightfall.’
‘Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,’ said Gimli.
‘Or break it,’ said Elrond. ‘Look not too far ahead! But go now
with good hearts! Farewell, and may the blessing of Elves and Men
and all Free Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!’
‘Good ... good luck!’ cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. ‘I don’t
suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall
expect a full account when you get back. And don’t be too long!
Farewell!’
Many others of Elrond’s household stood in the shadows and
watched them go, bidding them farewell with soft voices. There was
no laughter, and no song or music. At last they turned away and
faded silently into the dusk.
They crossed the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths
that led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length
to the high moor where the wind hissed through the heather. Then
with one glance at the Last Homely House twinkling below them
they strode away far into the night.
At the Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards
went on by narrow paths among the folded lands. Their purpose was
to hold this course west of the Mountains for many miles and days.
The country was much rougher and more barren than in the green
vale of the Great River in Wilderland on the other side of the range,
and their going would be slow; but they hoped in this way to escape
the notice of unfriendly eyes. The spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom
been seen in this empty country, and the paths were little known
except to the people of Rivendell.
Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew
this land even in the dark. The others were in ﬁle behind, and Legolas
whose eyes were keen was the rearguard. The ﬁrst part of their journey

282

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was hard and dreary, and Frodo remembered little of it, save the
wind. For many sunless days an icy blast came from the Mountains
in the east, and no garment seemed able to keep out its searching
ﬁngers. Though the Company was well clad, they seldom felt warm,
either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during the middle of
the day, in some hollow of the land, or hidden under the tangled
thorn-bushes that grew in thickets in many places. In the late afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold
and cheerless as a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a
ﬁre. In the evening they went on again, always as nearly southward
as they could ﬁnd a way.
At ﬁrst it seemed to the hobbits that although they walked and
stumbled until they were weary, they were creeping forward like
snails, and getting nowhere. Each day the land looked much the same
as it had the day before. Yet steadily the mountains were drawing
nearer. South of Rivendell they rose ever higher, and bent westwards;
and about the feet of the main range there was tumbled an ever wider
land of bleak hills, and deep valleys ﬁlled with turbulent waters. Paths
were few and winding, and led them often only to the edge of some
sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.
They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed.
The wind suddenly fell and then veered round to the south. The
swift-ﬂowing clouds lifted and melted away, and the sun came out,
pale and bright. There came a cold clear dawn at the end of a long
stumbling night-march. The travellers reached a low ridge crowned
with ancient holly-trees whose grey-green trunks seemed to have been
built out of the very stone of the hills. Their dark leaves shone and
their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun.
Away in the south Frodo could see the dim shapes of lofty mountains that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company
was taking. At the left of this high range rose three peaks; the tallest
and nearest stood up like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare,
northern precipice was still largely in the shadow, but where the
sunlight slanted upon it, it glowed red.
Gandalf stood at Frodo’s side and looked out under his hand. ‘We
have done well,’ he said. ‘We have reached the borders of the country
that Men call Hollin; many Elves lived here in happier days, when
Eregion was its name. Five-and-forty leagues as the crow ﬂies we
have come, though many long miles further our feet have walked.
The land and the weather will be milder now, but perhaps all the
more dangerous.’
‘Dangerous or not, a real sunrise is mighty welcome,’ said Frodo,
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face.

THE RING GOES SOUTH

283

‘But the mountains are ahead of us,’ said Pippin. ‘We must have
turned eastwards in the night.’
‘No,’ said Gandalf. ‘But you see further ahead in the clear light.
Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west. There are
many maps in Elrond’s house, but I suppose you never thought to
look at them?’
‘Yes I did, sometimes,’ said Pippin, ‘but I don’t remember them.
Frodo has a better head for that sort of thing.’
‘I need no map,’ said Gimli, who had come up with Legolas, and
was gazing out before him with a strange light in his deep eyes. ‘There
is the land where our fathers worked of old, and we have wrought
the image of those mountains into many works of metal and of stone,
and into many songs and tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz,
Zirak, Shathûr.
‘Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but
I know them and their names, for under them lies Khazad-dûm, the
Dwarrowdelf, that is now called the Black Pit, Moria in the Elvish
tongue. Yonder stands Barazinbar, the Redhorn, cruel Caradhras;
and beyond him are Silvertine and Cloudyhead: Celebdil the White,
and Fanuidhol the Grey, that we call Zirakzigil and Bundushathûr.
‘There the Misty Mountains divide, and between their arms lies
the deep-shadowed valley which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the
Dimrill Dale, which the Elves call Nanduhirion.’
‘It is for the Dimrill Dale that we are making,’ said Gandalf. ‘If
we climb the pass that is called the Redhorn Gate, under the far side
of Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep
vale of the Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River
Silverlode rises in its icy springs.’
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram,’ said Gimli, ‘and cold are the
springs of Kibil-nâla. My heart trembles at the thought that I may
see them soon.’
‘May you have joy of the sight, my good dwarf !’ said Gandalf.
‘But whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We
must go down the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so to the
Great River, and then——’
He paused.
‘Yes, and where then?’ asked Merry.
‘To the end of the journey – in the end,’ said Gandalf. ‘We cannot
look too far ahead. Let us be glad that the ﬁrst stage is safely over.
I think we will rest here, not only today but tonight as well. There
is a wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country
before it wholly forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.’
‘That is true,’ said Legolas. ‘But the Elves of this land were of a
race strange to us of the silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do

284

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

not now remember them. Only I hear the stones lament them: deep
they delved us, fair they wrought us, high they builded us; but they are
gone. They are gone. They sought the Havens long ago.’
That morning they lit a ﬁre in a deep hollow shrouded by great
bushes of holly, and their supper-breakfast was merrier than it had
been since they set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for
they expected to have all the night to sleep in, and they did not mean
to go on again until the evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was
silent and restless. After a while he left the Company and wandered
on to the ridge; there he stood in the shadow of a tree, looking out
southwards and westwards, with his head posed as if he was listening.
Then he returned to the brink of the dell and looked down at the
others laughing and talking.
‘What is the matter, Strider?’ Merry called up. ‘What are you
looking for? Do you miss the East Wind?’
‘No indeed,’ he answered. ‘But I miss something. I have been in
the country of Hollin in many seasons. No folk dwell here now, but
many other creatures live here at all times, especially birds. Yet now
all things but you are silent. I can feel it. There is no sound for miles
about us, and your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not
understand it.’
Gandalf looked up with sudden interest. ‘But what do you guess
is the reason?’ he asked. ‘Is there more in it than surprise at seeing
four hobbits, not to mention the rest of us, where people are so
seldom seen or heard?’
‘I hope that is it,’ answered Aragorn. ‘But I have a sense of watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.’
‘Then we must be more careful,’ said Gandalf. ‘If you bring a
Ranger with you, it is well to pay attention to him, especially if the
Ranger is Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set
the watch.’
It was Sam’s turn that day to take the ﬁrst watch, but Aragorn
joined him. The others fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even
Sam felt it. The breathing of the sleepers could be plainly heard. The
swish of the pony’s tail and the occasional movements of his feet
became loud noises. Sam could hear his own joints creaking, if he
stirred. Dead silence was around him, and over all hung a clear blue
sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. Away in the South a dark
patch appeared, and grew, and drove north like ﬂying smoke in the
wind.
‘What’s that, Strider? It don’t look like a cloud,’ said Sam in a
whisper to Aragorn. He made no answer, he was gazing intently at the

THE RING GOES SOUTH

285

sky; but before long Sam could see for himself what was approaching.
Flocks of birds, ﬂying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and
traversing all the land as if they were searching for something; and
they were steadily drawing nearer.
‘Lie ﬂat and still!’ hissed Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the
shade of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away
suddenly from the main host, and came, ﬂying low, straight towards
the ridge. Sam thought they were a kind of crow of large size. As
they passed overhead, in so dense a throng that their shadow followed
them darkly over the ground below, one harsh croak was heard.
Not until they had dwindled into the distance, north and west,
and the sky was again clear would Aragorn rise. Then he sprang up
and went and wakened Gandalf.
‘Regiments of black crows are ﬂying over all the land between the
Mountains and the Greyﬂood,’ he said, ‘and they have passed over
Hollin. They are not natives here; they are crebain out of Fangorn
and Dunland. I do not know what they are about: possibly there is
some trouble away south from which they are ﬂeeing; but I think
they are spying out the land. I have also glimpsed many hawks ﬂying
high up in the sky. I think we ought to move again this evening.
Hollin is no longer wholesome for us: it is being watched.’
‘And in that case so is the Redhorn Gate,’ said Gandalf; ‘and how
we can get over that without being seen, I cannot imagine. But we
will think of that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark,
I am afraid that you are right.’
‘Luckily our ﬁre made little smoke, and had burned low before
the crebain came,’ said Aragorn. ‘It must be put out and not lit again.’
‘Well if that isn’t a plague and a nuisance!’ said Pippin. The news:
no ﬁre, and a move again by night, had been broken to him, as soon
as he woke in the late afternoon. ‘All because of a pack of crows!
I had looked forward to a real good meal tonight: something hot.’
‘Well, you can go on looking forward,’ said Gandalf. ‘There may
be many unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like
a pipe to smoke in comfort, and warmer feet. However, we are certain
of one thing at any rate: it will get warmer as we get south.’
‘Too warm, I shouldn’t wonder,’ muttered Sam to Frodo. ‘But
I’m beginning to think it’s time we got a sight of that Fiery Mountain,
and saw the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at ﬁrst that this
here Redhorn, or whatever its name is, might be it, till Gimli spoke
his piece. A fair jaw-cracker dwarf-language must be!’ Maps conveyed
nothing to Sam’s mind, and all distances in these strange lands
seemed so vast that he was quite out of his reckoning.
All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds

286

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

passed over now and again; but as the westering Sun grew red they
disappeared southwards. At dusk the Company set out, and turning
now half east they steered their course towards Caradhras, which far
away still glowed faintly red in the last light of the vanished Sun.
One by one white stars sprang forth as the sky faded.
Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo
like the remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and
well planned, from Hollin to the mountain-pass. The Moon, now at
the full, rose over the mountains, and cast a pale light in which the
shadows of stones were black. Many of them looked to have been
worked by hands, though now they lay tumbled and ruinous in a
bleak, barren land.
It was the cold chill hour before the ﬁrst stir of dawn, and the
moon was low. Frodo looked up at the sky. Suddenly he saw or felt
a shadow pass over the high stars, as if for a moment they faded and
then ﬂashed out again. He shivered.
‘Did you see anything pass over?’ he whispered to Gandalf, who
was just ahead.
‘No, but I felt it, whatever it was,’ he answered. ‘It may be nothing,
only a wisp of thin cloud.’
‘It was moving fast then,’ muttered Aragorn, ‘and not with the
wind.’
Nothing further happened that night. The next morning dawned
even brighter than before. But the air was chill again; already the
wind was turning back towards the east. For two more nights they
marched on, climbing steadily but ever more slowly as their road
wound up into the hills, and the mountains towered up, nearer and
nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose before them, a mighty
peak, tipped with snow like silver, but with sheer naked sides, dull
red as if stained with blood.
There was a black look in the sky, and the sun was wan. The wind
had gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and
looked back.
‘Winter deepens behind us,’ he said quietly to Aragorn. ‘The
heights away north are whiter than they were; snow is lying far down
their shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up towards the
Redhorn Gate. We may well be seen by watchers on that narrow
path, and waylaid by some evil; but the weather may prove a more
deadly enemy than any. What do you think of your course now,
Aragorn?’
Frodo overheard these words, and understood that Gandalf and
Aragorn were continuing some debate that had begun long before.
He listened anxiously.

THE RING GOES SOUTH

287

‘I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know
well, Gandalf,’ answered Aragorn. ‘And perils known and unknown
will grow as we go on. But we must go on; and it is no good our
delaying the passage of the mountains. Further south there are no
passes, till one comes to the Gap of Rohan. I do not trust that way
since your news of Saruman. Who knows which side now the marshals
of the Horse-lords serve?’
‘Who knows indeed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is another way, and
not by the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have
spoken of.’
‘But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others,
I beg, not until it is plain that there is no other way.’
‘We must decide before we go further,’ answered Gandalf.
‘Then let us weigh the matter in our minds, while the others rest
and sleep,’ said Aragorn.
In the late afternoon, while the others were ﬁnishing their breakfast, Gandalf and Aragorn went aside together and stood looking at
Caradhras. Its sides were now dark and sullen, and its head was in
grey cloud. Frodo watched them, wondering which way the debate
would go. When they returned to the Company Gandalf spoke, and
then he knew that it had been decided to face the weather and the
high pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was the other
dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to ﬁll
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been
abandoned.
‘From signs that we have seen lately,’ said Gandalf, ‘I fear that
the Redhorn Gate may be watched; and also I have doubts of the
weather that is coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go
with all the speed that we can. Even so it will take us more than two
marches before we reach the top of the pass. Dark will come early
this evening. We must leave as soon as you can get ready.’
‘I will add a word of advice, if I may,’ said Boromir. ‘I was born
under the shadow of the White Mountains and know something of
journeys in the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse,
before we come down on the other side. It will not help us to keep
so secret that we are frozen to death. When we leave here, where
there are still a few trees and bushes, each of us should carry a faggot
of wood, as large as he can bear.’
‘And Bill could take a bit more, couldn’t you, lad?’ said Sam. The
pony looked at him mournfully.
‘Very well,’ said Gandalf. ‘But we must not use the wood – not
unless it is a choice between ﬁre and death.’
*
*
*

288

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The Company set out again, with good speed at ﬁrst; but soon
their way became steep and difﬁcult. The twisting and climbing road
had in many places almost disappeared, and was blocked with many
fallen stones. The night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A bitter
wind swirled among the rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the
knees of the great mountains. The narrow path now wound under a
sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which the grim ﬂanks of Caradhras
towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right was a gulf of darkness
where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine.
Laboriously they climbed a sharp slope and halted for a moment
at the top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm
and saw the dim white ﬂakes of snow settling on his sleeve.
They went on. But before long the snow was falling fast, ﬁlling all
the air, and swirling into Frodo’s eyes. The dark bent shapes of
Gandalf and Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen.
‘I don’t like this at all,’ panted Sam just behind. ‘Snow’s all right
on a ﬁne morning, but I like to be in bed while it’s falling. I wish
this lot would go off to Hobbiton! Folk might welcome it there.’
Except on the high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare
in the Shire, and was regarded as a pleasant event and a chance for
fun. No living hobbit (save Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter
of 1311, when white wolves invaded the Shire over the frozen
Brandywine.
Gandalf halted. Snow was thick on his hood and shoulders; it was
already ankle-deep about his boots.
‘This is what I feared,’ he said. ‘What do you say now, Aragorn?’
‘That I feared it too,’ Aragorn answered, ‘but less than other
things. I knew the risk of snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far
south, save high up in the mountains. But we are not high yet; we
are still far down, where the paths are usually open all the winter.’
‘I wonder if this is a contrivance of the Enemy,’ said Boromir.
‘They say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains
of Shadow that stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange
powers and many allies.’
‘His arm has grown long indeed,’ said Gimli, ‘if he can draw snow
down from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.’
‘His arm has grown long,’ said Gandalf.
While they were halted, the wind died down, and the snow slackened until it almost ceased. They tramped on again. But they had
not gone more than a furlong when the storm returned with fresh
fury. The wind whistled and the snow became a blinding blizzard.
Soon even Boromir found it hard to keep going. The hobbits, bent
nearly double, toiled along behind the taller folk, but it was plain

THE RING GOES SOUTH

289

that they could not go much further, if the snow continued. Frodo’s
feet felt like lead. Pippin was dragging behind. Even Gimli, as stout
as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged.
The Company halted suddenly, as if they had come to an agreement without any words being spoken. They heard eerie noises in
the darkness round them. It may have been only a trick of the wind
in the cracks and gullies of the rocky wall, but the sounds were those
of shrill cries, and wild howls of laughter. Stones began to fall from
the mountain-side, whistling over their heads, or crashing on the path
beside them. Every now and again they heard a dull rumble, as a
great boulder rolled down from hidden heights above.
‘We cannot go further tonight,’ said Boromir. ‘Let those call it the
wind who will; there are fell voices on the air; and these stones are
aimed at us.’
‘I do call it the wind,’ said Aragorn. ‘But that does not make what
you say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the
world that have little love for those that go on two legs, and yet are
not in league with Sauron, but have purposes of their own. Some
have been in this world longer than he.’
‘Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name,’ said Gimli,
‘long years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these
lands.’
‘It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off his attack,’
said Gandalf.
‘But what can we do?’ cried Pippin miserably. He was leaning on
Merry and Frodo, and he was shivering.
‘Either stop where we are, or go back,’ said Gandalf. ‘It is no good
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly, this path leaves
the cliff and runs into a wide shallow trough at the bottom of a long
hard slope. We should have no shelter there from snow, or stones –
or anything else.’
‘And it is no good going back while the storm holds,’ said Aragorn.
‘We have passed no place on the way up that offered more shelter
than this cliff-wall we are under now.’
‘Shelter!’ muttered Sam. ‘If this is shelter, then one wall and no
roof make a house.’
The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff as they
could. It faced southwards, and near the bottom it leaned out a little,
so that they hoped it would give them some protection from the
northerly wind and from the falling stones. But eddying blasts swirled
round them from every side, and the snow ﬂowed down in ever
denser clouds.
They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony

290

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

stood patiently but dejectedly in front of the hobbits, and screened
them a little; but before long the drifting snow was above his hocks,
and it went on mounting. If they had had no larger companions the
hobbits would soon have been entirely buried.
A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast
into a warm and hazy dream. He thought a ﬁre was heating his toes,
and out of the shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo’s
voice speaking. I don’t think much of your diary, he said. Snowstorms on
January the twelfth: there was no need to come back to report that!
But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an effort,
when he felt himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow.
‘This will be the death of the halﬂings, Gandalf,’ said Boromir.
‘It is useless to sit here until the snow goes over our heads. We must
do something to save ourselves.’
‘Give them this,’ said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing
out a leathern ﬂask. ‘Just a mouthful each – for all of us. It is very
precious. It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me
at our parting. Pass it round!’
As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant
liquor he felt a new strength of heart, and the heavy drowsiness left
his limbs. The others also revived and found fresh hope and vigour.
But the snow did not relent. It whirled about them thicker than ever,
and the wind blew louder.
‘What do you say to ﬁre?’ asked Boromir suddenly. ‘The choice
seems near now between ﬁre and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall
be hidden from all unfriendly eyes when the snow has covered us,
but that will not help us.’
‘You may make a ﬁre, if you can,’ answered Gandalf. ‘If there are
any watchers that can endure this storm, then they can see us, ﬁre
or no.’
But though they had brought wood and kindlings by the advice
of Boromir, it passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a ﬂame
that would hold amid the swirling wind or catch in the wet fuel. At
last reluctantly Gandalf himself took a hand. Picking up a faggot he
held it aloft for a moment, and then with a word of command, naur
an edraith ammen! he thrust the end of his staff into the midst of it.
At once a great spout of green and blue ﬂame sprang out, and the
wood ﬂared and sputtered.
‘If there are any to see, then I at least am revealed to them,’ he
said. ‘I have written Gandalf is here in signs that all can read from
Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.’
But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly eyes.
Their hearts were rejoiced to see the light of the ﬁre. The wood

THE RING GOES SOUTH

291

burned merrily; and though all round it the snow hissed, and pools
of slush crept under their feet, they warmed their hands gladly at the
blaze. There they stood, stooping in a circle round the little dancing
and blowing ﬂames. A red light was on their tired and anxious faces;
behind them the night was like a black wall.
But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell.
The ﬁre burned low, and the last faggot was thrown on.
‘The night is getting old,’ said Aragorn. ‘The dawn is not far off.’
‘If any dawn can pierce these clouds,’ said Gimli.
Boromir stepped out of the circle and stared up into the blackness.
‘The snow is growing less,’ he said, ‘and the wind is quieter.’
Frodo gazed wearily at the ﬂakes still falling out of the dark to be
revealed white for a moment in the light of the dying ﬁre; but for a
long time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly,
as sleep was beginning to creep over him again, he was aware that
the wind had indeed fallen, and the ﬂakes were becoming larger and
fewer. Very slowly a dim light began to grow. At last the snow stopped
altogether.
As the light grew stronger it showed a silent shrouded world.
Below their refuge were white humps and domes and shapeless deeps
beneath which the path that they had trodden was altogether lost;
but the heights above were hidden in great clouds still heavy with
the threat of snow.
Gimli looked up and shook his head. ‘Caradhras has not forgiven
us,’ he said. ‘He has more snow yet to ﬂing at us, if we go on. The
sooner we go back and down the better.’
To this all agreed, but their retreat was now difﬁcult. It might well
prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their ﬁre the
snow lay many feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in
places it had been scooped and piled by the wind into great drifts
against the cliff.
‘If Gandalf would go before us with a bright ﬂame, he might melt
a path for you,’ said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and
he alone of the Company remained still light of heart.
‘If Elves could ﬂy over mountains, they might fetch the Sun to
save us,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I must have something to work on.
I cannot burn snow.’
‘Well,’ said Boromir, ‘when heads are at a loss bodies must serve,
as we say in my country. The strongest of us must seek a way. See!
Though all is now snow-clad, our path, as we came up, turned about
that shoulder of rock down yonder. It was there that the snow ﬁrst
began to burden us. If we could reach that point, maybe it would
prove easier beyond. It is no more than a furlong off, I guess.’

292

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Then let us force a path thither, you and I!’ said Aragorn.
Aragorn was the tallest of the Company, but Boromir, little less
in height, was broader and heavier in build. He led the way, and
Aragorn followed him. Slowly they moved off, and were soon toiling
heavily. In places the snow was breast-high, and often Boromir
seemed to be swimming or burrowing with his great arms rather than
walking.
Legolas watched them for a while with a smile upon his lips, and
then he turned to the others. ‘The strongest must seek a way, say
you? But I say: let a ploughman plough, but choose an otter for
swimming, and for running light over grass and leaf, or over snow –
an Elf.’
With that he sprang forth nimbly, and then Frodo noticed as if
for the ﬁrst time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no
boots, but wore only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made
little imprint in the snow.
‘Farewell!’ he said to Gandalf. ‘I go to ﬁnd the Sun!’ Then swift
as a runner over ﬁrm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the
toiling men, with a wave of his hand he passed them, and sped into
the distance, and vanished round the rocky turn.
The others waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and
Aragorn dwindled into black specks in the whiteness. At length they
too passed from sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered,
and now a few ﬂakes of snow came curling down again.
An hour, maybe, went by, though it seemed far longer, and then
at last they saw Legolas coming back. At the same time Boromir
and Aragorn reappeared round the bend far behind him and came
labouring up the slope.
‘Well,’ cried Legolas as he ran up, ‘I have not brought the Sun.
She is walking in the blue ﬁelds of the South, and a little wreath of
snow on this Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have
brought back a gleam of good hope for those who are doomed to go
on feet. There is the greatest wind-drift of all just beyond the turn,
and there our Strong Men were almost buried. They despaired, until
I returned and told them that the drift was little wider than a wall.
And on the other side the snow suddenly grows less, while further
down it is no more than a white coverlet to cool a hobbit’s toes.’
‘Ah, it is as I said,’ growled Gimli. ‘It was no ordinary storm. It
is the ill will of Caradhras. He does not love Elves and Dwarves, and
that drift was laid to cut off our escape.’
‘But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you have Men with
you,’ said Boromir, who came up at that moment. ‘And doughty
Men too, if I may say it; though lesser men with spades might have

THE RING GOES SOUTH

293

served you better. Still, we have thrust a lane through the drift; and
for that all here may be grateful who cannot run as light as Elves.’
‘But how are we to get down there, even if you have cut through
the drift?’ said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.
‘Have hope!’ said Boromir. ‘I am weary, but I still have some
strength left, and Aragorn too. We will bear the little folk. The others
no doubt will make shift to tread the path behind us. Come, Master
Peregrin! I will begin with you.’
He lifted up the hobbit. ‘Cling to my back! I shall need my arms,’
he said and strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin
marvelled at his strength, seeing the passage that he had already
forced with no other tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened
as he was, he was widening the track for those who followed, thrusting
the snow aside as he went.
They came at length to the great drift. It was ﬂung across the
mountain-path like a sheer and sudden wall, and its crest, sharp as
if shaped with knives, reared up more than twice the height of Boromir; but through the middle a passage had been beaten, rising and
falling like a bridge. On the far side Merry and Pippin were set down,
and there they waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to
arrive.
After a while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in the narrow
but now well-trodden track came Gandalf, leading Bill with Gimli
perched among the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo.
They passed through the lane; but hardly had Frodo touched the
ground when with a deep rumble there rolled down a fall of stones
and slithering snow. The spray of it half blinded the Company as
they crouched against the cliff, and when the air cleared again they
saw that the path was blocked behind them.
‘Enough, enough!’ cried Gimli. ‘We are departing as quickly as
we may!’ And indeed with that last stroke the malice of the mountain
seemed to be expended, as if Caradhras was satisﬁed that the invaders
had been beaten off and would not dare to return. The threat of
snow lifted; the clouds began to break and the light grew broader.
As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow became steadily
more shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could
trudge along. Soon they all stood once more on the ﬂat shelf at the
head of the steep slope where they had felt the ﬁrst ﬂakes of snow
the night before.
The morning was now far advanced. From the high place they
looked back westwards over the lower lands. Far away in the tumble
of country that lay at the foot of the mountain was the dell from
which they had started to climb the pass.
Frodo’s legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and

294

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

his head was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march
downhill. Black specks swam before his eyes. He rubbed them, but
the black specks remained. In the distance below him, but still high
above the lower foothills, dark dots were circling in the air.
‘The birds again!’ said Aragorn, pointing down.
‘That cannot be helped now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Whether they are
good or evil, or have nothing to do with us at all, we must go down
at once. Not even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another
night-fall!’
A cold wind ﬂowed down behind them, as they turned their
backs on the Redhorn Gate, and stumbled wearily down the slope.
Caradhras had defeated them.

Chapter 4
A JOURNEY IN THE DARK
It was evening, and the grey light was again waning fast, when they
halted for the night. They were very weary. The mountains were
veiled in deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared
them one more mouthful each of the miruvor of Rivendell. When
they had eaten some food he called a council.
‘We cannot, of course, go on again tonight,’ he said. ‘The attack
on the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a
while.’
‘And then where are we to go?’ asked Frodo.
‘We still have our journey and our errand before us,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.’
Pippin’s face brightened visibly at the mere mention of return to
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked up hopefully. But Aragorn and
Boromir made no sign. Frodo looked troubled.
‘I wish I was back there,’ he said. ‘But how can I return without
shame – unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already
defeated?’
‘You are right, Frodo,’ said Gandalf: ‘to go back is to admit defeat,
and face worse defeat to come. If we go back now, then the Ring
must remain there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner
or later Rivendell will be besieged, and after a brief and bitter time
it will be destroyed. The Ringwraiths are deadly enemies, but they
are only shadows yet of the power and terror they would possess if
the Ruling Ring was on their master’s hand again.’
‘Then we must go on, if there is a way,’ said Frodo with a sigh.
Sam sank back into gloom.
‘There is a way that we may attempt,’ said Gandalf. ‘I thought
from the beginning, when ﬁrst I considered this journey, that we
should try it. But it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of
it to the Company before. Aragorn was against it, until the pass over
the mountains had at least been tried.’
‘If it is a worse road than the Redhorn Gate, then it must be evil
indeed,’ said Merry. ‘But you had better tell us about it, and let us
know the worst at once.’
‘The road that I speak of leads to the Mines of Moria,’ said
Gandalf. Only Gimli lifted up his head; a smouldering ﬁre was in his
eyes. On all the others a dread fell at the mention of that name. Even
to the hobbits it was a legend of vague fear.

296

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘The road may lead to Moria, but how can we hope that it will
lead through Moria?’ said Aragorn darkly.
‘It is a name of ill omen,’ said Boromir. ‘Nor do I see the need
to go there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we come to the Gap of Rohan, where men are friendly
to my people, taking the road that I followed on my way hither. Or
we might pass by and cross the Isen into Langstrand and Lebennin,
and so come to Gondor from the regions nigh to the sea.’
‘Things have changed since you came north, Boromir,’ answered
Gandalf. ‘Did you not hear what I told you of Saruman? With him
I may have business of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must
not come near Isengard, if that can by any means be prevented. The
Gap of Rohan is closed to us while we go with the Bearer.
‘As for the longer road: we cannot afford the time. We might
spend a year in such a journey, and we should pass through many
lands that are empty and harbourless. Yet they would not be safe.
The watchful eyes both of Saruman and of the Enemy are on them.
When you came north, Boromir, you were in the Enemy’s eyes only
one stray wanderer from the South and a matter of small concern to
him: his mind was busy with the pursuit of the Ring. But you return
now as a member of the Ring’s Company, and you are in peril as
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase with every
league that we go south under the naked sky.
‘Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has
become more desperate, I fear. I see now little hope, if we do not
soon vanish from sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I
advise that we should go neither over the mountains, nor round them,
but under them. That is a road at any rate that the Enemy will least
expect us to take.’
‘We do not know what he expects,’ said Boromir. ‘He may watch
all roads, likely and unlikely. In that case to enter Moria would be
to walk into a trap, hardly better than knocking at the gates of the
Dark Tower itself. The name of Moria is black.’
‘You speak of what you do not know, when you liken Moria to
the stronghold of Sauron,’ answered Gandalf. ‘I alone of you have
ever been in the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in his older
and lesser dwelling in Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of
Barad-dûr do not return. But I would not lead you into Moria if
there were no hope of coming out again. If there are Orcs there, it
may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs of the Misty
Mountains were scattered or destroyed in the Battle of Five Armies.
The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there
is a hope that Moria is still free.
‘There is even a chance that Dwarves are there, and that in some

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

297

deep hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However
it may prove, one must tread the path that need chooses!’
‘I will tread the path with you, Gandalf !’ said Gimli. ‘I will go
and look on the halls of Durin, whatever may wait there – if you can
ﬁnd the doors that are shut.’
‘Good, Gimli!’ said Gandalf. ‘You encourage me. We will seek
the hidden doors together. And we will come through. In the ruins
of the Dwarves, a dwarf ’s head will be less easy to bewilder than
Elves or Men or Hobbits. Yet it will not be the ﬁrst time that I have
been to Moria. I sought there long for Thráin son of Thrór after he
was lost. I passed through, and I came out again alive!’
‘I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,’ said Aragorn quietly; ‘but
though I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish
to enter Moria a second time.’
‘And I don’t wish to enter it even once,’ said Pippin.
‘Nor me,’ muttered Sam.
‘Of course not!’ said Gandalf. ‘Who would? But the question is:
who will follow me, if I lead you there?’
‘I will,’ said Gimli eagerly.
‘I will,’ said Aragorn heavily. ‘You followed my lead almost to
disaster in the snow, and have said no word of blame. I will follow
your lead now – if this last warning does not move you. It is not of
the Ring, nor of us others that I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf.
And I say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware!’
‘I will not go,’ said Boromir; ‘not unless the vote of the whole
Company is against me. What do Legolas and the little folk say? The
Ring-bearer’s voice surely should be heard?’
‘I do not wish to go to Moria,’ said Legolas.
The hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo
spoke. ‘I do not wish to go,’ he said; ‘but neither do I wish to refuse
the advice of Gandalf. I beg that there should be no vote, until we
have slept on it. Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the
morning than in this cold gloom. How the wind howls!’
At these words all fell into silent thought. They heard the wind
hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and
wailing round them in the empty spaces of the night.
Suddenly Aragorn leapt to his feet. ‘How the wind howls!’ he
cried. ‘It is howling with wolf-voices. The Wargs have come west of
the Mountains!’
‘Need we wait until morning then?’ said Gandalf. ‘It is as I said.
The hunt is up! Even if we live to see the dawn, who now will wish
to journey south by night with the wild wolves on his trail?’
‘How far is Moria?’ asked Boromir.

298

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘There was a door south-west of Caradhras, some ﬁfteen miles as
the crow ﬂies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,’ answered Gandalf
grimly.
‘Then let us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if we can,’ said
Boromir. ‘The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one
fears.’
‘True!’ said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. ‘But where
the warg howls, there also the orc prowls.’
‘I wish I had taken Elrond’s advice,’ muttered Pippin to Sam. ‘I
am no good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras
the Bullroarer in me: these howls freeze my blood. I don’t ever
remember feeling so wretched.’
‘My heart’s right down in my toes, Mr. Pippin,’ said Sam. ‘But we
aren’t etten yet, and there are some stout folk here with us. Whatever
may be in store for old Gandalf, I’ll wager it isn’t a wolf ’s belly.’
For their defence in the night the Company climbed to the top of
the small hill under which they had been sheltering. It was crowned
with a knot of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle
of boulder-stones. In the midst of this they lit a ﬁre, for there was
no hope that darkness and silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs.
Round the ﬁre they sat, and those that were not on guard dozed
uneasily. Poor Bill the pony trembled and sweated where he stood.
The howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer
and sometimes further off. In the dead of night many shining eyes
were seen peering over the brow of the hill. Some advanced almost
to the ring of stones. At a gap in the circle a great dark wolf-shape
could be seen halted, gazing at them. A shuddering howl broke from
him, as if he were a captain summoning his pack to the assault.
Gandalf stood up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft.
‘Listen, Hound of Sauron!’ he cried. ‘Gandalf is here. Fly, if you
value your foul skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come
within this ring.’
The wolf snarled and sprang towards them with a great leap. At
that moment there was a sharp twang. Legolas had loosed his bow.
There was a hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to the
ground; the Elvish arrow had pierced its throat. The watching eyes
were suddenly extinguished. Gandalf and Aragorn strode forward,
but the hill was deserted; the hunting packs had ﬂed. All about them
the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on the sighing wind.
The night was old, and westward the waning moon was setting,
gleaming ﬁtfully through the breaking clouds. Suddenly Frodo started

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

299

from sleep. Without warning a storm of howls broke out ﬁerce and
wild all about the camp. A great host of Wargs had gathered silently
and was now attacking them from every side at once.
‘Fling fuel on the ﬁre!’ cried Gandalf to the hobbits. ‘Draw your
blades, and stand back to back!’
In the leaping light, as the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many
grey shapes spring over the ring of stones. More and more followed.
Through the throat of one huge leader Aragorn passed his sword
with a thrust; with a great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another.
Beside them Gimli stood with his stout legs apart, wielding his dwarfaxe. The bow of Legolas was singing.
In the wavering ﬁrelight Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he
rose up, a great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient
king of stone set upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning
branch and strode to meet the wolves. They gave back before him.
High in the air he tossed the blazing brand. It ﬂared with a sudden
white radiance like lightning; and his voice rolled like thunder.
‘Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!’ he cried.
There was a roar and a crackle, and the tree above him burst into
a leaf and bloom of blinding ﬂame. The ﬁre leapt from tree-top to
tree-top. The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light. The swords
and knives of the defenders shone and ﬂickered. The last arrow of
Legolas kindled in the air as it ﬂew, and plunged burning into the
heart of a great wolf-chieftain. All the others ﬂed.
Slowly the ﬁre died till nothing was left but falling ash and sparks;
a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly
from the hill, as the ﬁrst light of dawn came dimly in the sky. Their
enemies were routed and did not return.
‘What did I tell you, Mr. Pippin?’ said Sam, sheathing his sword.
‘Wolves won’t get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake!
Nearly singed the hair off my head!’
When the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves
were to be found, and they looked in vain for the bodies of the dead.
No trace of the ﬁght remained but the charred trees and the arrows
of Legolas lying on the hill-top. All were undamaged save one of
which only the point was left.
‘It is as I feared,’ said Gandalf. ‘These were no ordinary wolves
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!’
That day the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the
command of some power that had no longer any use for snow, since
they had retreated from the pass, a power that wished now to have
a clear light in which things that moved in the wild could be seen
from far away. The wind had been turning through north to

300

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

north-west during the night, and now it failed. The clouds vanished
southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue. As they stood
upon the hillside, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over the
mountain-tops.
‘We must reach the doors before sunset,’ said Gandalf, ‘or I fear
we shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be
winding, for here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in
this country, and only once have I been under the west wall of Moria,
and that was long ago.
‘There it lies,’ he said, pointing away south-eastwards to where
the mountains’ sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet. In the
distance could be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs, and in their midst,
taller than the rest, one great grey wall. ‘When we left the pass I led
you southwards, and not back to our starting point, as some of you
may have noticed. It is well that I did so, for now we have several
miles less to cross, and haste is needed. Let us go!’
‘I do not know which to hope,’ said Boromir grimly: ‘that Gandalf
will ﬁnd what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall ﬁnd the
gates lost for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between
wolves and the wall the likeliest chance. Lead on!’
Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard’s side, so eager was he to
come to Moria. Together they led the Company back towards the
mountains. The only road of old to Moria from the west had lain
along the course of a stream, the Sirannon, that ran out from the
feet of the cliffs near where the doors had stood. But either Gandalf
was astray, or else the land had changed in recent years; for he did
not strike the stream where he looked to ﬁnd it, only a few miles
southwards from their start.
The morning was passing towards noon, and still the Company
wandered and scrambled in a barren country of red stones. Nowhere
could they see any gleam of water or hear any sound of it. All was
bleak and dry. Their hearts sank. They saw no living thing, and not
a bird was in the sky; but what the night would bring, if it caught
them in that lost land, none of them cared to think.
Suddenly Gimli, who had pressed on ahead, called back to them.
He was standing on a knoll and pointing to the right. Hurrying up
they saw below them a deep and narrow channel. It was empty and
silent, and hardly a trickle of water ﬂowed among the brown and
red-stained stones of its bed; but on the near side there was a path,
much broken and decayed, that wound its way among the ruined
walls and paving-stones of an ancient highroad.
‘Ah! Here it is at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘This is where the stream
ran: Sirannon, the Gate-stream, they used to call it. But what has

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

301

happened to the water, I cannot guess; it used to be swift and noisy.
Come! We must hurry on. We are late.’
The Company were footsore and tired; but they trudged doggedly
along the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned
from the noon and began to go west. After a brief halt and a hasty
meal they went on again. Before them the mountains frowned, but
their path lay in a deep trough of land and they could see only the
higher shoulders and the far eastward peaks.
At length they came to a sharp bend. There the road, which had
been veering southwards between the brink of the channel and a
steep fall of the land to the left, turned and went due east again.
Rounding the corner they saw before them a low cliff, some ﬁve
fathoms high, with a broken and jagged top. Over it a trickling water
dripped, through a wide cleft that seemed to have been carved out
by a fall that had once been strong and full.
‘Indeed things have changed!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no mistaking the place. There is all that remains of the Stair Falls. If I
remember right, there was a ﬂight of steps cut in the rock at their
side, but the main road wound away left and climbed with several
loops up to the level ground at the top. There used to be a shallow
valley beyond the falls right up to the Walls of Moria, and the Sirannon ﬂowed through it with the road beside it. Let us go and see what
things are like now!’
They found the stone steps without difﬁculty, and Gimli sprang
swiftly up them, followed by Gandalf and Frodo. When they reached
the top they saw that they could go no further that way, and the
reason for the drying up of the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind
them the sinking Sun ﬁlled the cool western sky with glimmering
gold. Before them stretched a dark still lake. Neither sky nor sunset
was reﬂected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had been dammed
and had ﬁlled all the valley. Beyond the ominous water were reared
vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in the fading light: ﬁnal and impassable. No sign of gate or entrance, not a ﬁssure or crack could Frodo
see in the frowning stone.
‘There are the Walls of Moria,’ said Gandalf, pointing across the
water. ‘And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door
at the end of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this
way is blocked. None of the Company, I guess, will wish to swim
this gloomy water at the end of the day. It has an unwholesome look.’
‘We must ﬁnd a way round the northern edge,’ said Gimli. ‘The
ﬁrst thing for the Company to do is to climb up by the main path
and see where that will lead us. Even if there were no lake, we could
not get our baggage-pony up this stair.’

302

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘But in any case we cannot take the poor beast into the Mines,’
said Gandalf. ‘The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there
are places narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Frodo. ‘I had not thought of that. And poor
Sam! I wonder what he will say?’
‘I am sorry,’ said Gandalf. ‘Poor Bill has been a useful companion,
and it goes to my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled
lighter and brought no animal, least of all this one that Sam is fond
of, if I had had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged
to take this road.’
The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in
the sky high above the sunset, when the Company, with all the speed
they could, climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake.
In breadth it looked to be no more than two or three furlongs at the
widest point. How far it stretched away southward they could not
see in the failing light; but its northern end was no more than half a
mile from where they stood, and between the stony ridges that
enclosed the valley and the water’s edge there was a rim of open
ground. They hurried forward, for they had still a mile or two to go
before they could reach the point on the far shore that Gandalf was
making for; and then he had still to ﬁnd the doors.
When they came to the northernmost corner of the lake they found
a narrow creek that barred their way. It was green and stagnant,
thrust out like a slimy arm towards the enclosing hills. Gimli strode
forward undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more
than ankle-deep at the edge. Behind him they walked in ﬁle, threading
their way with care, for under the weedy pools were sliding and greasy
stones, and footing was treacherous. Frodo shuddered with disgust
at the touch of the dark unclean water on his feet.
As Sam, the last of the Company, led Bill up on to the dry ground
on the far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop,
as if a ﬁsh had disturbed the still surface of the water. Turning quickly
they saw ripples, black-edged with shadow in the waning light: great
rings were widening outwards from a point far out in the lake. There
was a bubbling noise, and then silence. The dusk deepened, and the
last gleams of the sunset were veiled in cloud.
Gandalf now pressed on at a great pace, and the others followed
as quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry land between
the lake and the cliffs: it was narrow, often hardly a dozen yards
across, and encumbered with fallen rock and stones; but they found
a way, hugging the cliff, and keeping as far from the dark water as
they might. A mile southwards along the shore they came upon holly
trees. Stumps and dead boughs were rotting in the shallows, the

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

303

remains it seemed of old thickets, or of a hedge that had once lined
the road across the drowned valley. But close under the cliff there
stood, still strong and living, two tall trees, larger than any trees of
holly that Frodo had ever seen or imagined. Their great roots spread
from the wall to the water. Under the looming cliffs they had looked
like mere bushes, when seen far off from the top of the Stair; but
now they towered overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing deep
night-shadows about their feet, standing like sentinel pillars at the
end of the road.
‘Well, here we are at last!’ said Gandalf. ‘Here the Elven-way from
Hollin ended. Holly was the token of the people of that land, and they
planted it here to mark the end of their domain; for the West-door was
made chieﬂy for their use in their trafﬁc with the Lords of Moria. Those
were happier days, when there was still close friendship at times
between folk of different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.’
‘It was not the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship waned,’
said Gimli.
‘I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,’ said Legolas.
‘I have heard both,’ said Gandalf; ‘and I will not give judgement
now. But I beg you two, Legolas and Gimli, at least to be friends,
and to help me. I need you both. The doors are shut and hidden,
and the sooner we ﬁnd them the better. Night is at hand!’
Turning to the others he said: ‘While I am searching, will you
each make ready to enter the Mines? For here I fear we must say
farewell to our good beast of burden. You must lay aside much of
the stuff that we brought against bitter weather: you will not need it
inside, nor, I hope, when we come through and journey on down
into the South. Instead each of us must take a share of what the pony
carried, especially the food and the water-skins.’
‘But you can’t leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken place,
Mr. Gandalf !’ cried Sam, angry and distressed. ‘I won’t have it, and
that’s ﬂat. After he has come so far and all!’
‘I am sorry, Sam,’ said the wizard. ‘But when the Door opens I
do not think you will be able to drag your Bill inside, into the long
dark of Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.’
‘He’d follow Mr. Frodo into a dragon’s den, if I led him,’ protested
Sam. ‘It’d be nothing short of murder to turn him loose with all these
wolves about.’
‘It will be short of murder, I hope,’ said Gandalf. He laid his hand
on the pony’s head, and spoke in a low voice. ‘Go with words of
guard and guiding on you,’ he said. ‘You are a wise beast, and have
learned much in Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can
ﬁnd grass, and so come in time to Elrond’s house, or wherever you
wish to go.

304

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘There, Sam! He will have quite as much chance of escaping wolves
and getting home as we have.’
Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill,
seeming to understand well what was going on, nuzzled up to him,
putting his nose to Sam’s ear. Sam burst into tears, and fumbled
with the straps, unlading all the pony’s packs and throwing them on
the ground. The others sorted out the goods, making a pile of all
that could be left behind, and dividing up the rest.
When this was done they turned to watch Gandalf. He appeared
to have done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing
at the blank wall of the cliff, as if he would bore a hole into it with
his eyes. Gimli was wandering about, tapping the stone here and
there with his axe. Legolas was pressed against the rock, as if listening.
‘Well, here we are and all ready,’ said Merry; ‘but where are the
Doors? I can’t see any sign of them.’
‘Dwarf-doors are not made to be seen when shut,’ said Gimli.
‘They are invisible, and their own makers cannot ﬁnd them or open
them, if their secret is forgotten.’
‘But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to
Dwarves,’ said Gandalf, coming suddenly to life and turning round.
‘Unless things are altogether changed, eyes that know what to look
for may discover the signs.’
He walked forward to the wall. Right between the shadow of the
trees there was a smooth space, and over this he passed his hands to
and fro, muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘Can you see anything now?’
The Moon now shone upon the grey face of the rock; but they
could see nothing else for a while. Then slowly on the surface, where
the wizard’s hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins
of silver running in the stone. At ﬁrst they were no more than pale
gossamer-threads, so ﬁne that they only twinkled ﬁtfully where the
Moon caught them, but steadily they grew broader and clearer, until
their design could be guessed.
At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was an arch of interlacing letters in an Elvish character. Below, though the threads were
in places blurred or broken, the outline could be seen of an anvil and
a hammer surmounted by a crown with seven stars. Beneath these
again were two trees, each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than
all else there shone forth in the middle of the door a single star with
many rays.
‘There are the emblems of Durin!’ cried Gimli.
‘And there is the Tree of the High Elves!’ said Legolas.
‘And the Star of the House of Fëanor,’ said Gandalf. ‘They are
wrought of ithildin that mirrors only starlight and moonlight, and

306

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

sleeps until it is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten
in Middle-earth. It is long since I heard them, and I thought deeply
before I could recall them to my mind.’
‘What does the writing say?’ asked Frodo, who was trying to
decipher the inscription on the arch. ‘I thought I knew the elf-letters,
but I cannot read these.’
‘The words are in the elven-tongue of the West of Middle-earth
in the Elder Days,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But they do not say anything
of importance to us. They say only: The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria.
Speak, friend, and enter. And underneath small and faint is written:
I, Narvi, made them. Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.’
‘What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?’ asked Merry.
‘That is plain enough,’ said Gimli. ‘If you are a friend, speak the
password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘these doors are probably governed by words.
Some dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for particular
persons; and some have locks and keys that are still needed when all
necessary times and words are known. These doors have no key. In
the days of Durin they were not secret. They usually stood open and
doorwards sat here. But if they were shut, any who knew the opening
word could speak it and pass in. At least so it is recorded, is it not,
Gimli?’
‘It is,’ said the dwarf. ‘But what the word was is not remembered.
Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.’
‘But do not you know the word, Gandalf ?’ asked Boromir in surprise.
‘No!’ said the wizard.
The others looked dismayed; only Aragorn, who knew Gandalf
well, remained silent and unmoved.
‘Then what was the use of bringing us to this accursed spot?’ cried
Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at the dark water. ‘You told
us that you had once passed through the Mines. How could that be,
if you did not know how to enter?’
‘The answer to your ﬁrst question, Boromir,’ said the wizard, ‘is
that I do not know the word – yet. But we shall soon see. And,’ he
added, with a glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, ‘you may
ask what is the use of my deeds when they are proved useless. As for
your other question: do you doubt my tale? Or have you no wits left?
I did not enter this way. I came from the East.
‘If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors open outwards.
From the inside you may thrust them open with your hands. From
the outside nothing will move them save the spell of command. They
cannot be forced inwards.’
‘What are you going to do then?’ asked Pippin, undaunted by the
wizard’s bristling brows.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

307

‘Knock on the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,’ said Gandalf.
‘But if that does not shatter them, and I am allowed a little peace
from foolish questions, I will seek for the opening words.
‘I once knew every spell in all the tongues of Elves or Men or
Orcs, that was ever used for such a purpose. I can still remember
ten score of them without searching in my mind. But only a few
trials, I think, will be needed; and I shall not have to call on Gimli
for words of the secret dwarf-tongue that they teach to none. The
opening words were Elvish, like the writing on the arch: that seems
certain.’
He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff
the silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil.
Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen!
Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen!
he said in a commanding voice. The silver lines faded, but the blank
grey stone did not stir.
Many times he repeated these words in different order, or varied
them. Then he tried other spells, one after another, speaking now
faster and louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single
words of Elvish speech. Nothing happened. The cliff towered into
the night, the countless stars were kindled, the wind blew cold, and
the doors stood fast.
Again Gandalf approached the wall, and lifting up his arms he
spoke in tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and
struck the rock with his staff. Open, open! he shouted, and followed it
with the same command in every language that had ever been spoken
in the West of Middle-earth. Then he threw his staff on the ground,
and sat down in silence.
At that moment from far off the wind bore to their listening ears
the howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang
to his side and whispered softly to him.
‘Do not let him run away!’ said Boromir. ‘It seems that we shall
need him still, if the wolves do not ﬁnd us. How I hate this foul
pool!’ He stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the
dark water.
The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at the same instant there
was a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface
out beyond where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly
towards the foot of the cliff.
‘Why did you do that, Boromir?’ said Frodo. ‘I hate this place,
too, and I am afraid. I don’t know of what: not of wolves, or the

308

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

dark behind the doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool.
Don’t disturb it!’
‘I wish we could get away!’ said Merry.
‘Why doesn’t Gandalf do something quick?’ said Pippin.
Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat with his head bowed,
either in despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the
wolves was heard again. The ripples on the water grew and came
closer; some were already lapping on the shore.
With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang to his
feet. He was laughing! ‘I have it!’ he cried. ‘Of course, of course!
Absurdly simple, like most riddles when you see the answer.’
Picking up his staff he stood before the rock and said in a clear
voice: Mellon!
The star shone out brieﬂy and faded again. Then silently a great
doorway was outlined, though not a crack or joint had been visible
before. Slowly it divided in the middle and swung outwards inch by
inch, until both doors lay back against the wall. Through the opening
a shadowy stair could be seen climbing steeply up; but beyond the
lower steps the darkness was deeper than the night. The Company
stared in wonder.
‘I was wrong after all,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli too. Merry, of all
people, was on the right track. The opening word was inscribed on
the archway all the time! The translation should have been: Say
‘‘Friend’’ and enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend
and the doors opened. Quite simple. Too simple for a learned loremaster in these suspicious days. Those were happier times. Now let
us go!’
He strode forward and set his foot on the lowest step. But at that
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize him by
the ankle, and he fell with a cry. Bill the pony gave a wild neigh of
fear, and turned tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the
darkness. Sam leaped after him, and then hearing Frodo’s cry he ran
back again, weeping and cursing. The others swung round and saw
the waters of the lake seething, as if a host of snakes were swimming
up from the southern end.
Out from the water a long sinuous tentacle had crawled; it was
pale-green and luminous and wet. Its ﬁngered end had hold of
Frodo’s foot, and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees
was now slashing at it with a knife.
The arm let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out
for help. Twenty other arms came rippling out. The dark water
boiled, and there was a hideous stench.
‘Into the gateway! Up the stairs! Quick!’ shouted Gandalf leaping

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

309

back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all
but Sam to the ground where they stood, he drove them forward.
They were just in time. Sam and Frodo were only a few steps up,
and Gandalf had just begun to climb, when the groping tentacles
writhed across the narrow shore and ﬁngered the cliff-wall and the
doors. One came wriggling over the threshold, glistening in the starlight. Gandalf turned and paused. If he was considering what word
would close the gate again from within, there was no need. Many
coiling arms seized the doors on either side, and with horrible
strength, swung them round. With a shattering echo they slammed,
and all light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came dully
through the ponderous stone.
Sam, clinging to Frodo’s arm, collapsed on a step in the black
darkness. ‘Poor old Bill!’ he said in a choking voice. ‘Poor old Bill!
Wolves and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him. I had to
choose, Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.’
They heard Gandalf go back down the steps and thrust his staff
against the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs
trembled, but the doors did not open.
‘Well, well!’ said the wizard. ‘The passage is blocked behind us
now, and there is only one way out – on the other side of the mountains. I fear from the sounds that boulders have been piled up, and
the trees uprooted and thrown across the gate. I am sorry; for the
trees were beautiful, and had stood so long.’
‘I felt that something horrible was near from the moment that my
foot ﬁrst touched the water,’ said Frodo. ‘What was the thing, or
were there many of them?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf; ‘but the arms were all guided
by one purpose. Something has crept, or has been driven out of dark
waters under the mountains. There are older and fouler things than
Orcs in the deep places of the world.’ He did not speak aloud his
thought that whatever it was that dwelt in the lake, it had seized on
Frodo ﬁrst among all the Company.
Boromir muttered under his breath, but the echoing stone magniﬁed the sound to a hoarse whisper that all could hear: ‘In the deep
places of the world! And thither we are going against my wish. Who
will lead us now in this deadly dark?’
‘I will,’ said Gandalf, ‘and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my
staff !’
As the wizard passed on ahead up the great steps, he held his staff
aloft, and from its tip there came a faint radiance. The wide stairway
was sound and undamaged. Two hundred steps they counted, broad

310

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and shallow; and at the top they found an arched passage with a level
ﬂoor leading on into the dark.
‘Let us sit and rest and have something to eat, here on the landing,
since we can’t ﬁnd a dining-room!’ said Frodo. He had begun to
shake off the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt
extremely hungry.
The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the
upper steps, dim ﬁgures in the gloom. After they had eaten, Gandalf
gave them each a third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell.
‘It will not last much longer, I am afraid,’ he said; ‘but I think we
need it after that horror at the gate. And unless we have great luck,
we shall need all that is left before we see the other side! Go carefully
with the water, too! There are many streams and wells in the Mines,
but they should not be touched. We may not have a chance of ﬁlling
our skins and bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.’
‘How long is that going to take us?’ asked Frodo.
‘I cannot say,’ answered Gandalf. ‘It depends on many chances. But
going straight, without mishap or losing our way, we shall take three or
four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from Westdoor to East-gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.’
After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were
eager to get the journey over as quickly as possible, and were willing,
tired as they were, to go on marching still for several hours. Gandalf
walked in front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering
staff, the light of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his
right he held his sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes
glinting in the dim light as he turned his head from side to side.
Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and he had drawn the short sword,
Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting or of Glamdring; and
that was some comfort, for being the work of Elvish smiths in the
Elder Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs were
near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, and
the young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and
silent, walked Aragorn.
The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend.
It went steadily down for a long while before it became level once
again. The air grew hot and stiﬂing, but it was not foul, and at
times they felt currents of cooler air upon their faces, issuing from
half-guessed openings in the walls. There were many of these. In the
pale ray of the wizard’s staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and
arches, and of other passages and tunnels, sloping up, or running
steeply down, or opening blankly dark on either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

311

Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage. At
least he was not, as were most of the others, troubled by the mere
darkness in itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where
the choice of way was doubtful; but it was always Gandalf who had
the ﬁnal word. The Mines of Moria were vast and intricate beyond the
imagination of Gimli, Glóin’s son, dwarf of the mountain-race though
he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of a journey long before were
now of little help, but even in the gloom and despite all windings of
the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did not falter, as
long as there was a path that led towards his goal.
‘Do not be afraid!’ said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than
usual, and Gandalf and Gimli were whispering together; the others
were crowded behind, waiting anxiously. ‘Do not be afraid! I have
been with him on many a journey, if never on one so dark; and there
are tales in Rivendell of greater deeds of his than any that I have
seen. He will not go astray – if there is any path to ﬁnd. He has led
us in here against our fears, but he will lead us out again, at whatever
cost to himself. He is surer of ﬁnding the way home in a blind night
than the cats of Queen Berúthiel.’
It was well for the Company that they had such a guide. They had
no fuel nor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at
the doors many things had been left behind. But without any light
they would soon have come to grief. There were not only many roads
to choose from, there were also in many places holes and pitfalls,
and dark wells beside the path in which their passing feet echoed.
There were ﬁssures and chasms in the walls and ﬂoor, and every now
and then a crack would open right before their feet. The widest was
more than seven feet across, and it was long before Pippin could
summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap. The noise
of churning water came up from far below, as if some great mill-wheel
was turning in the depths.
‘Rope!’ muttered Sam. ‘I knew I’d want it, if I hadn’t got it!’
As these dangers became more frequent their march became
slower. Already they seemed to have been tramping on, on, endlessly
to the mountains’ roots. They were more than weary, and yet there
seemed no comfort in the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo’s spirits
had risen for a while after his escape, and after food and a draught
of the cordial; but now a deep uneasiness, growing to dread, crept
over him again. Though he had been healed in Rivendell of the
knife-stroke, that grim wound had not been without effect. His senses
were sharper and more aware of things that could not be seen. One
sign of change that he soon had noticed was that he could see more

312

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in the dark than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And
he was in any case the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain
against his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt
the certainty of evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing.
He gripped tighter on the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly.
The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried
whispers. There was no sound but the sound of their own feet: the
dull stump of Gimli’s dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the light
step of Legolas; the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the
rear the slow ﬁrm footfalls of Aragorn with his long stride. When they
halted for a moment they heard nothing at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear,
or to imagine that he heard, something else: like the faint fall of soft
bare feet. It was never loud enough, or near enough, for him to feel
certain that he heard it; but once it had started it never stopped, while
the Company was moving. But it was not an echo, for when they halted
it pattered on for a little all by itself, and then grew still.
It was after nightfall when they had entered the Mines. They had
been going for several hours with only brief halts, when Gandalf
came to his ﬁrst serious check. Before him stood a wide dark arch
opening into three passages: all led in the same general direction,
eastwards; but the left-hand passage plunged down, while the righthand climbed up, and the middle way seemed to run on, smooth
and level but very narrow.
‘I have no memory of this place at all!’ said Gandalf, standing
uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of ﬁnding
some marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of
the kind was to be seen. ‘I am too weary to decide,’ he said, shaking
his head. ‘And I expect that you are all as weary as I am, or wearier.
We had better halt here for what is left of the night. You know what
I mean! In here it is ever dark; but outside the late Moon is riding
westward and the middle-night has passed.’
‘Poor old Bill!’ said Sam. ‘I wonder where he is. I hope those
wolves haven’t got him yet.’
To the left of the great arch they found a stone door: it was half
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed
to lie a wide chamber cut in the rock.
‘Steady! Steady!’ cried Gandalf, as Merry and Pippin pushed forward, glad to ﬁnd a place where they could rest with at least more
feeling of shelter than in the open passage. ‘Steady! You do not know
what is inside yet. I will go ﬁrst.’
He went in cautiously, and the others ﬁled behind. ‘There!’ he
said, pointing with his staff to the middle of the ﬂoor. Before his feet

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

313

they saw a large round hole like the mouth of a well. Broken and
rusty chains lay at the edge and trailed down into the black pit.
Fragments of stone lay near.
‘One of you might have fallen in and still be wondering when you
were going to strike the bottom,’ said Aragorn to Merry. ‘Let the
guide go ﬁrst while you have one.’
‘This seems to have been a guardroom, made for the watching of
the three passages,’ said Gimli. ‘That hole was plainly a well for the
guards’ use, covered with a stone lid. But the lid is broken, and we
must all take care in the dark.’
Pippin felt curiously attracted by the well. While the others were
unrolling blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber,
as far as possible from the hole in the ﬂoor, he crept to the edge and
peered over. A chill air seemed to strike his face, rising from invisible
depths. Moved by a sudden impulse he groped for a loose stone, and
let it drop. He felt his heart beat many times before there was any
sound. Then far below, as if the stone had fallen into deep water in
some cavernous place, there came a plunk, very distant, but magniﬁed
and repeated in the hollow shaft.
‘What’s that?’ cried Gandalf. He was relieved when Pippin confessed what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see his
eye glinting. ‘Fool of a Took!’ he growled. ‘This is a serious journey,
not a hobbit walking-party. Throw yourself in next time, and then
you will be no further nuisance. Now be quiet!’
Nothing more was heard for several minutes; but then there came
out of the depths faint knocks: tom-tap, tap-tom. They stopped, and
when the echoes had died away, they were repeated: tap-tom, tom-tap,
tap-tap, tom. They sounded disquietingly like signals of some sort;
but after a while the knocking died away and was not heard again.
‘That was the sound of a hammer, or I have never heard one,’
said Gimli.
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf, ‘and I do not like it. It may have nothing to
do with Peregrin’s foolish stone; but probably something has been
disturbed that would have been better left quiet. Pray, do nothing of
the kind again! Let us hope we shall get some rest without further
trouble. You, Pippin, can go on the ﬁrst watch, as a reward,’ he
growled, as he rolled himself in a blanket.
Pippin sat miserably by the door in the pitch dark; but he kept on
turning round, fearing that some unknown thing would crawl up out
of the well. He wished he could cover the hole, if only with a blanket,
but he dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed
to be asleep.
Actually Gandalf was awake, though lying still and silent. He was
deep in thought, trying to recall every memory of his former journey

314

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in the Mines, and considering anxiously the next course that he
should take; a false turn now might be disastrous. After an hour he
rose up and came over to Pippin.
‘Get into a corner and have a sleep, my lad,’ he said in a kindly
tone. ‘You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so I may as
well do the watching.’
‘I know what is the matter with me,’ he muttered, as he sat down
by the door. ‘I need smoke! I have not tasted it since the morning
before the snowstorm.’
The last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took him, was a dark
glimpse of the old wizard huddled on the ﬂoor, shielding a glowing
chip in his gnarled hands between his knees. The ﬂicker for a moment
showed his sharp nose, and the puff of smoke.
It was Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He had sat and
watched all alone for about six hours, and had let the others rest.
‘And in the watches I have made up my mind,’ he said. ‘I do not
like the feel of the middle way; and I do not like the smell of the
left-hand way: there is foul air down there, or I am no guide. I shall
take the right-hand passage. It is time we began to climb up again.’
For eight dark hours, not counting two brief halts, they marched
on; and they met no danger, and heard nothing, and saw nothing but
the faint gleam of the wizard’s light, bobbing like a will-o’-the-wisp in
front of them. The passage they had chosen wound steadily upwards.
As far as they could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as
it rose it grew loftier and wider. There were now no openings to
other galleries or tunnels on either side, and the ﬂoor was level and
sound, without pits or cracks. Evidently they had struck what once
had been an important road; and they went forward quicker than
they had done on their ﬁrst march.
In this way they advanced some ﬁfteen miles, measured in a direct
line east, though they must have actually walked twenty miles or
more. As the road climbed upwards, Frodo’s spirits rose a little; but
he still felt oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard,
away behind the Company and beyond the fall and patter of their
feet, a following footstep that was not an echo.
They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest,
and all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly
the walls to right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed
through some arched doorway into a black and empty space. There
was a great draught of warmer air behind them, and before them the
darkness was cold on their faces. They halted and crowded anxiously
together.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

315

Gandalf seemed pleased. ‘I chose the right way,’ he said. ‘At last
we are coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far
now from the eastern side. But we are high up, a good deal higher
than the Dimrill Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the
air we must be in a wide hall. I will now risk a little real light.’
He raised his staff, and for a brief instant there was a blaze like a
ﬂash of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and ﬂed, and for a second
they saw a vast roof far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars
hewn of stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty
hall; its black walls, polished and smooth as glass, ﬂashed and glittered.
Three other entrances they saw, dark black arches: one straight before
them eastwards, and one on either side. Then the light went out.
‘That is all that I shall venture on for the present,’ said Gandalf.
‘There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts
leading out to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think
we have reached them now, but it is night outside again, and we
cannot tell until morning. If I am right, tomorrow we may actually
see the morning peeping in. But in the meanwhile we had better go
no further. Let us rest, if we can. Things have gone well so far, and
the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are not through yet,
and it is a long way down to the Gates that open on the world.’
The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled
close together in a corner to escape the draught: there seemed to be
a steady inﬂow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about
them as they lay hung the darkness, hollow and immense, and they
were oppressed by the loneliness and vastness of the dolven halls and
endlessly branching stairs and passages. The wildest imaginings that
dark rumour had ever suggested to the hobbits fell altogether short
of the actual dread and wonder of Moria.
‘There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one
time,’ said Sam; ‘and every one of them busier than badgers for ﬁve
hundred years to make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did
they do it all for? They didn’t live in these darksome holes surely?’
‘These are not holes,’ said Gimli. ‘This is the great realm and city
of the Dwarrowdelf. And of old it was not darksome, but full of light
and splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.’
He rose and standing in the dark he began to chant in a deep
voice, while the echoes ran away into the roof.
The world was young, the mountains green,
No stain yet on the Moon was seen,
No words were laid on stream or stone
When Durin woke and walked alone.

316

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He named the nameless hills and dells;
He drank from yet untasted wells;
He stooped and looked in Mirrormere,
And saw a crown of stars appear,
As gems upon a silver thread,
Above the shadow of his head.
The world was fair, the mountains tall,
In Elder Days before the fall
Of mighty kings in Nargothrond
And Gondolin, who now beyond
The Western Seas have passed away:
The world was fair in Durin’s Day.
A king he was on carven throne
In many-pillared halls of stone
With golden roof and silver ﬂoor,
And runes of power upon the door.
The light of sun and star and moon
In shining lamps of crystal hewn
Undimmed by cloud or shade of night
There shone for ever fair and bright.
There hammer on the anvil smote,
There chisel clove, and graver wrote;
There forged was blade, and bound was hilt;
The delver mined, the mason built.
There beryl, pearl, and opal pale,
And metal wrought like ﬁshes’ mail,
Buckler and corslet, axe and sword,
And shining spears were laid in hoard.
Unwearied then were Durin’s folk;
Beneath the mountains music woke:
The harpers harped, the minstrels sang,
And at the gates the trumpets rang.
The world is grey, the mountains old,
The forge’s ﬁre is ashen-cold;
No harp is wrung, no hammer falls:
The darkness dwells in Durin’s halls;
The shadow lies upon his tomb
In Moria, in Khazad-dûm.

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

317

But still the sunken stars appear
In dark and windless Mirrormere;
There lies his crown in water deep,
Till Durin wakes again from sleep.
‘I like that!’ said Sam. ‘I should like to learn it. In Moria, in
Khazad-dûm! But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking of all
those lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here still?’
Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more.
‘Piles of jewels?’ said Gandalf. ‘No. The Orcs have often plundered
Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves
ﬂed, no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep
places: they are drowned in water – or in a shadow of fear.’
‘Then what do the dwarves want to come back for?’ asked Sam.
‘For mithril,’ answered Gandalf. ‘The wealth of Moria was not in
gold and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant.
Such things they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did
not need to delve for them: all things that they desired they could
obtain in trafﬁc. For here alone in the world was found Moria-silver,
or true-silver as some have called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The
Dwarves have a name which they do not tell. Its worth was ten times
that of gold, and now it is beyond price; for little is left above ground,
and even the Orcs dare not delve here for it. The lodes lead away
north towards Caradhras, and down to darkness. The Dwarves tell
no tale; but even as mithril was the foundation of their wealth, so
also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and too deep,
and disturbed that from which they ﬂed, Durin’s Bane. Of what they
brought to light the Orcs have gathered nearly all, and given it in
tribute to Sauron, who covets it.
‘Mithril! All folk desired it. It could be beaten like copper, and
polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light
and yet harder than tempered steel. Its beauty was like to that of
common silver, but the beauty of mithril did not tarnish or grow dim.
The Elves dearly loved it, and among many uses they made of it
ithildin, starmoon, which you saw upon the doors. Bilbo had a corslet
of mithril-rings that Thorin gave him. I wonder what has become of
it? Gathering dust still in Michel Delving Mathom-house, I suppose.’
‘What?’ cried Gimli, startled out of his silence. ‘A corslet of Moriasilver? That was a kingly gift!’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf. ‘I never told him, but its worth was greater
than the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.’
Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and
touched the rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he
had been walking about with the price of the Shire under his jacket.

318

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Had Bilbo known? He felt no doubt that Bilbo knew quite well. It
was indeed a kingly gift. But now his thoughts had been carried away
from the dark Mines, to Rivendell, to Bilbo, and to Bag End in the
days while Bilbo was still there. He wished with all his heart that he
was back there, and in those days, mowing the lawn, or pottering
among the ﬂowers, and that he had never heard of Moria, or mithril
– or the Ring.
A deep silence fell. One by one the others fell asleep. Frodo was
on guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors
out of deep places, dread came over him. His hands were cold and
his brow damp. He listened. All his mind was given to listening and
nothing else for two slow hours; but he heard no sound, not even
the imagined echo of a footfall.
His watch was nearly over, when, far off where he guessed that
the western archway stood, he fancied that he could see two pale
points of light, almost like luminous eyes. He started. His head had
nodded. ‘I must have nearly fallen asleep on guard,’ he thought. ‘I
was on the edge of a dream.’ He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and
remained standing, peering into the dark, until he was relieved by
Legolas.
When he lay down he quickly went to sleep, but it seemed to him
that the dream went on: he heard whispers, and saw the two pale
points of light approaching, slowly. He woke and found that the
others were speaking softly near him, and that a dim light was falling
on his face. High up above the eastern archway through a shaft near
the roof came a long pale gleam; and across the hall through the
northern arch light also glimmered faint and distantly.
Frodo sat up. ‘Good morning!’ said Gandalf. ‘For morning it is
again at last. I was right, you see. We are high up on the east side
of Moria. Before today is over we ought to ﬁnd the Great Gates and
see the waters of Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.’
‘I shall be glad,’ said Gimli. ‘I have looked on Moria, and it is
very great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found
no sign of my kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.’
After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at once.
‘We are tired, but we shall rest better when we are outside,’ he said.
‘I think that none of us will wish to spend another night in
Moria.’
‘No indeed!’ said Boromir. ‘Which way shall we take? Yonder
eastward arch?’
‘Maybe,’ said Gandalf. ‘But I do not know yet exactly where we
are. Unless I am quite astray, I guess that we are above and to the

A JOURNEY IN THE DARK

319

north of the Great Gates; and it may not be easy to ﬁnd the right
road down to them. The eastern arch will probably prove to be the
way that we must take; but before we make up our minds we ought
to look about us. Let us go towards that light in the north door. If
we could ﬁnd a window it would help, but I fear that the light comes
only down deep shafts.’
Following his lead the Company passed under the northern arch.
They found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the
glimmer grew stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway
on their right. It was high and ﬂat-topped, and the stone door was
still upon its hinges, standing half open. Beyond it was a large square
chamber. It was dimly lit, but to their eyes, after so long a time in
the dark, it seemed dazzlingly bright, and they blinked as they entered.
Their feet disturbed a deep dust upon the ﬂoor, and stumbled
among things lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at
ﬁrst make out. The chamber was lit by a wide shaft high in the further
eastern wall; it slanted upwards and, far above, a small square patch
of blue sky could be seen. The light of the shaft fell directly on a
table in the middle of the room: a single oblong block, about two
feet high, upon which was laid a great slab of white stone.
‘It looks like a tomb,’ muttered Frodo, and bent forwards with a
curious sense of foreboding, to look more closely at it. Gandalf came
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven:

320

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘These are Daeron’s Runes, such as were used of old in Moria,’
said Gandalf. ‘Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:
balin son of fundin
lord of moria.’
‘He is dead then,’ said Frodo. ‘I feared it was so.’ Gimli cast his
hood over his face.

Chapter 5
ˆ M
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU
The Company of the Ring stood silent beside the tomb of Balin.
Frodo thought of Bilbo and his long friendship with the dwarf, and
of Balin’s visit to the Shire long ago. In that dusty chamber in the
mountains it seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of
the world.
At length they stirred and looked up, and began to search for
anything that would give them tidings of Balin’s fate, or show what
had become of his folk. There was another smaller door on the other
side of the chamber, under the shaft. By both the doors they could
now see that many bones were lying, and among them were broken
swords and axe-heads, and cloven shields and helms. Some of the
swords were crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades.
There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them
were large iron-bound chests of wood. All had been broken and
plundered; but beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains
of a book. It had been slashed and stabbed and partly burned, and
it was so stained with black and other dark marks like old blood that
little of it could be read. Gandalf lifted it carefully, but the leaves
cracked and broke as he laid it on the slab. He pored over it for some
time without speaking. Frodo and Gimli standing at his side could
see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they were written by many
different hands, in runes, both of Moria and of Dale, and here and
there in Elvish script.
At last Gandalf looked up. ‘It seems to be a record of the fortunes
of Balin’s folk,’ he said. ‘I guess that it began with their coming to
Dimrill Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the pages seem to have numbers
referring to the years after their arrival. The top page is marked one
– three, so at least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!
‘We drove out orcs from the great gate and guard – I think; the next
word is blurred and burned: probably room – we slew many in the
bright – I think – sun in the dale. Flói was killed by an arrow. He slew
the great. Then there is a blur followed by Flói under grass near Mirror
mere. The next line or two I cannot read. Then comes We have taken
the twentyﬁrst hall of North end to dwell in. There is I cannot read what.
A shaft is mentioned. Then Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of
Mazarbul.’
‘The Chamber of Records,’ said Gimli. ‘I guess that is where we
now stand.’

322

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Well, I can read no more for a long way,’ said Gandalf, ‘except
the word gold, and Durin’s Axe and something helm. Then Balin is
now lord of Moria. That seems to end a chapter. After some stars
another hand begins, and I can see we found truesilver, and later the
word wellforged, and then something, I have it! mithril; and the last
´ to seek for the upper armouries of Third Deep, something
two lines Oin
go westwards, a blur, to Hollin gate.’
Gandalf paused and set a few leaves aside. ‘There are several pages
of the same sort, rather hastily written and much damaged,’ he said;
‘but I can make little of them in this light. Now there must be a
number of leaves missing, because they begin to be numbered ﬁve,
the ﬁfth year of the colony, I suppose. Let me see! No, they are too
cut and stained; I cannot read them. We might do better in the
sunlight. Wait! Here is something: a large bold hand using an Elvish
script.’
‘That would be Ori’s hand,’ said Gimli, looking over the wizard’s
arm. ‘He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish
characters.’
‘I fear he had ill tidings to record in a fair hand,’ said Gandalf.
‘The ﬁrst clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless
it ends in estre. Yes, it must be yestre followed by day being the tenth
of novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone to
look in Mirror mere. an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc,
but many more ... up from east up the Silverlode. The remainder of the
page is so blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think
I can read we have barred the gates, and then can hold them long if,
and then perhaps horrible and suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have
kept the title that he took for less than ﬁve years. I wonder what
happened afterwards; but there is no time to puzzle out the last few
pages. Here is the last page of all.’ He paused and sighed.
‘It is grim reading,’ he said. ‘I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We
cannot get out. We cannot get out. They have taken the Bridge and second
hall. Frár and Lóni and Náli fell there. Then there are four lines
smeared so that I can only read went 5 days ago. The last lines run
the pool is up to the wall at Westgate. The Watcher in the Water took
´
Oin.
We cannot get out. The end comes, and then drums, drums in the
deep. I wonder what that means. The last thing written is in a trailing
scrawl of elf-letters: they are coming. There is nothing more.’ Gandalf
paused and stood in silent thought.
A sudden dread and a horror of the chamber fell on the Company.
‘We cannot get out,’ muttered Gimli. ‘It was well for us that the pool
had sunk a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the
southern end.’

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

323

Gandalf raised his head and looked round. ‘They seem to have
made a last stand by both doors,’ he said; ‘but there were not many
left by that time. So ended the attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant
but foolish. The time is not come yet. Now, I fear, we must say
farewell to Balin son of Fundin. Here he must lie in the halls of his
fathers. We will take this book, the Book of Mazarbul, and look at
it more closely later. You had better keep it, Gimli, and take it back
to Dáin, if you get a chance. It will interest him, though it will grieve
him deeply. Come, let us go! The morning is passing.’
‘Which way shall we go?’ asked Boromir.
‘Back to the hall,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But our visit to this room
has not been in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as
Gimli says, the Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the
twenty-ﬁrst of the North-end. Therefore we should leave by the
eastern arch of the hall, and bear right and south, and go downwards.
The Twenty-ﬁrst Hall should be on the Seventh Level, that is six
above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall!’
Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came a great
noise: a rolling Boom that seemed to come from depths far below,
and to tremble in the stone at their feet. They sprang towards the
door in alarm. Doom, doom it rolled again, as if huge hands were
turning the very caverns of Moria into a vast drum. Then there came
an echoing blast: a great horn was blown in the hall, and answering
horns and harsh cries were heard further off. There was a hurrying
sound of many feet.
‘They are coming!’ cried Legolas.
‘We cannot get out,’ said Gimli.
‘Trapped!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Why did I delay? Here we are, caught,
just as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see
what——’
Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook.
‘Slam the doors and wedge them!’ shouted Aragorn. ‘And keep
your packs on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our
way out yet.’
‘No!’ said Gandalf. ‘We must not get shut in. Keep the east door
ajar! We will go that way, if we get a chance.’
Another harsh horn-call and shrill cries rang out. Feet were coming
down the corridor. There was a ring and clatter as the Company
drew their swords. Glamdring shone with a pale light, and Sting
glinted at the edges. Boromir set his shoulder against the western
door.
‘Wait a moment! Do not close it yet!’ said Gandalf. He sprang
forward to Boromir’s side and drew himself up to his full height.

324

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Who comes hither to disturb the rest of Balin Lord of Moria?’ he
cried in a loud voice.
There was a rush of hoarse laughter, like the fall of sliding stones
into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command.
Doom, boom, doom went the drums in the deep.
With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before the narrow opening of the door and thrust forward his staff. There was a dazzling
ﬂash that lit the chamber and the passage outside. For an instant the
wizard looked out. Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor
as he sprang back.
‘There are Orcs, very many of them,’ he said. ‘And some are large
and evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging
back, but there is something else there. A great cave-troll, I think,
or more than one. There is no hope of escape that way.’
‘And no hope at all, if they come at the other door as well,’ said
Boromir.
‘There is no sound outside here yet,’ said Aragorn, who was standing by the eastern door listening. ‘The passage on this side plunges
straight down a stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall.
But it is no good ﬂying blindly this way with the pursuit just behind.
We cannot block the door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken,
and it opens inwards. We must do something to delay the enemy
ﬁrst. We will make them fear the Chamber of Mazarbul!’ he said
grimly, feeling the edge of his sword, Andúril.
Heavy feet were heard in the corridor. Boromir ﬂung himself
against the door and heaved it to; then he wedged it with broken
sword-blades and splinters of wood. The Company retreated to the
other side of the chamber. But they had no chance to ﬂy yet. There
was a blow on the door that made it quiver; and then it began to
grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A huge arm and shoulder,
with a dark skin of greenish scales, was thrust through the widening
gap. Then a great, ﬂat, toeless foot was forced through below. There
was a dead silence outside.
Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might;
but his sword rang, glanced aside, and fell from his shaken hand.
The blade was notched.
Suddenly, and to his own surprise, Frodo felt a hot wrath blaze
up in his heart. ‘The Shire!’ he cried, and springing beside Boromir,
he stooped, and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was
a bellow, and the foot jerked back, nearly wrenching Sting from
Frodo’s arm. Black drops dripped from the blade and smoked on
the ﬂoor. Boromir hurled himself against the door and slammed it
again.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

325

‘One for the Shire!’ cried Aragorn. ‘The hobbit’s bite is deep! You
have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo!’
There was a crash on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams
and hammers were beating against it. It cracked and staggered back,
and the opening grew suddenly wide. Arrows came whistling in, but
struck the northern wall, and fell harmlessly to the ﬂoor. There was
a horn-blast and a rush of feet, and orcs one after another leaped
into the chamber.
How many there were the Company could not count. The affray
was sharp, but the orcs were dismayed by the ﬁerceness of the
defence. Legolas shot two through the throat. Gimli hewed the legs
from under another that had sprung up on Balin’s tomb. Boromir and
Aragorn slew many. When thirteen had fallen the rest ﬂed shrieking,
leaving the defenders unharmed, except for Sam who had a scratch
along the scalp. A quick duck had saved him; and he had felled his
orc: a sturdy thrust with his Barrow-blade. A ﬁre was smouldering
in his brown eyes that would have made Ted Sandyman step backwards, if he had seen it.
‘Now is the time!’ cried Gandalf. ‘Let us go, before the troll
returns!’
But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had
reached the stair outside, a huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad
in black mail from head to foot, leaped into the chamber; behind
him his followers clustered in the doorway. His broad ﬂat face was
swart, his eyes were like coals, and his tongue was red; he wielded a
great spear. With a thrust of his huge hide shield he turned Boromir’s
sword and bore him backwards, throwing him to the ground. Diving
under Aragorn’s blow with the speed of a striking snake he charged
into the Company and thrust with his spear straight at Frodo. The
blow caught him on the right side, and Frodo was hurled against the
wall and pinned. Sam, with a cry, hacked at the spear-shaft, and it
broke. But even as the orc ﬂung down the truncheon and swept out
his scimitar, Andúril came down upon his helm. There was a ﬂash
like ﬂame and the helm burst asunder. The orc fell with cloven
head. His followers ﬂed howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at
them.
Doom, doom went the drums in the deep. The great voice rolled
out again.
‘Now!’ shouted Gandalf. ‘Now is the last chance. Run for it!’
Aragorn picked up Frodo where he lay by the wall and made for
the stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in front of him. The others
followed; but Gimli had to be dragged away by Legolas: in spite of
the peril he lingered by Balin’s tomb with his head bowed. Boromir

326

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

hauled the eastern door to, grinding upon its hinges: it had great iron
rings on either side, but could not be fastened.
‘I am all right,’ gasped Frodo. ‘I can walk. Put me down!’
Aragorn nearly dropped him in his amazement. ‘I thought you
were dead!’ he cried.
‘Not yet!’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is no time for wonder. Off you
go, all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the
bottom, but if I do not come soon, go on! Go quickly and choose
paths leading right and downwards.’
‘We cannot leave you to hold the door alone!’ said Aragorn.
‘Do as I say!’ said Gandalf ﬁercely. ‘Swords are no more use here.
Go!’
The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped
their way down a long ﬂight of steps, and then looked back; but they
could see nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer of the
wizard’s staff. He seemed to be still standing on guard by the closed
door. Frodo breathed heavily and leaned against Sam, who put his
arms about him. They stood peering up the stairs into the darkness.
Frodo thought he could hear the voice of Gandalf above, muttering
words that ran down the sloping roof with a sighing echo. He could
not catch what was said. The walls seemed to be trembling. Every
now and again the drum-beats throbbed and rolled: doom, doom.
Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white light.
Then there was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats
broke out wildly: doom-boom, doom-boom, and then stopped. Gandalf
came ﬂying down the steps and fell to the ground in the midst of the
Company.
‘Well, well! That’s over!’ said the wizard struggling to his feet. ‘I
have done all that I could. But I have met my match, and have nearly
been destroyed. But don’t stand here! Go on! You will have to do
without light for a while: I am rather shaken. Go on! Go on! Where
are you, Gimli? Come ahead with me! Keep close behind, all of you!’
They stumbled after him wondering what had happened. Doom,
doom went the drum-beats again: they now sounded mufﬂed and far
away, but they were following. There was no other sound of pursuit,
neither tramp of feet, nor any voice. Gandalf took no turns, right or
left, for the passage seemed to be going in the direction that he
desired. Every now and again it descended a ﬂight of steps, ﬁfty or
more, to a lower level. At the moment that was their chief danger;
for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they came on it
and put their feet out into emptiness. Gandalf felt the ground with
his staff like a blind man.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

327

At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little
more, and had descended many ﬂights of stairs. There was still no
sound of pursuit. Almost they began to hope that they would escape.
At the bottom of the seventh ﬂight Gandalf halted.
‘It is getting hot!’ he gasped. ‘We ought to be down at least to the
level of the Gates now. Soon I think we should look for a left-hand
turn to take us east. I hope it is not far. I am very weary. I must rest
here a moment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.’
Gimli took his arm and helped him down to a seat on the step.
‘What happened away up there at the door?’ he asked. ‘Did you meet
the beater of the drums?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Gandalf. ‘But I found myself suddenly
faced by something that I have not met before. I could think of
nothing to do but to try and put a shutting-spell on the door. I know
many; but to do things of that kind rightly requires time, and even
then the door can be broken by strength.
‘As I stood there I could hear orc-voices on the other side: at any
moment I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear what
was said; they seemed to be talking in their own hideous language.
All I caught was ghâsh: that is ‘‘ﬁre’’. Then something came into the
chamber – I felt it through the door, and the orcs themselves were
afraid and fell silent. It laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived
me and my spell.
‘What it was I cannot guess, but I have never felt such a challenge.
The counter-spell was terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the
door left my control and began to open! I had to speak a word of
Command. That proved too great a strain. The door burst in pieces.
Something dark as a cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and
I was thrown backwards down the stairs. All the wall gave way, and
the roof of the chamber as well, I think.
‘I am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something else is
buried there too. I cannot say. But at least the passage behind us
was completely blocked. Ah! I have never felt so spent, but it is
passing. And now what about you, Frodo? There was not time to
say so, but I have never been more delighted in my life than when
you spoke. I feared that it was a brave but dead hobbit that Aragorn
was carrying.’
‘What about me?’ said Frodo. ‘I am alive, and whole I think. I am
bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.’
‘Well,’ said Aragorn, ‘I can only say that hobbits are made of a
stuff so tough that I have never met the like of it. Had I known, I
would have spoken softer in the Inn at Bree! That spear-thrust would
have skewered a wild boar!’
‘Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad to say,’ said Frodo; ‘though

328

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

I feel as if I had been caught between a hammer and an anvil.’ He
said no more. He found breathing painful.
‘You take after Bilbo,’ said Gandalf. ‘There is more about you
than meets the eye, as I said of him long ago.’ Frodo wondered if
the remark meant more than it said.
They now went on again. Before long Gimli spoke. He had keen
eyes in the dark. ‘I think,’ he said, ‘that there is a light ahead. But it
is not daylight. It is red. What can it be?’
‘Ghâsh!’ muttered Gandalf. ‘I wonder if that is what they meant:
that the lower levels are on ﬁre? Still, we can only go on.’
Soon the light became unmistakable, and could be seen by all. It
was ﬂickering and glowing on the walls away down the passage before
them. They could now see their way: in front the road sloped down
swiftly, and some way ahead there stood a low archway; through it
the growing light came. The air became very hot.
When they came to the arch Gandalf went through, signing to
them to wait. As he stood just beyond the opening they saw his face
lit by a red glow. Quickly he stepped back.
‘There is some new devilry here,’ he said, ‘devised for our welcome,
no doubt. But I know now where we are: we have reached the First
Deep, the level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second
Hall of Old Moria; and the Gates are near: away beyond the eastern
end, on the left, not more than a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge,
up a broad stair, along a wide road, through the First Hall, and out!
But come and look!’
They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was
loftier and far longer than the one in which they had slept. They
were near its eastern end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down
the centre stalked a double line of towering pillars. They were carved
like boles of mighty trees whose boughs upheld the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems were smooth and black, but a red
glow was darkly mirrored in their sides. Right across the ﬂoor, close
to the feet of two huge pillars a great ﬁssure had opened. Out of it
a ﬁerce red light came, and now and again ﬂames licked at the brink
and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps of dark smoke
wavered in the hot air.
‘If we had come by the main road down from the upper halls, we
should have been trapped here,’ said Gandalf. ‘Let us hope that the ﬁre
now lies between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.’
Even as he spoke they heard again the pursuing drum-beat: Doom,
doom, doom. Away beyond the shadows at the western end of the hall
there came cries and horn-calls. Doom, doom: the pillars seemed to
tremble and the ﬂames to quiver.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

329

‘Now for the last race!’ said Gandalf. ‘If the sun is shining outside,
we may still escape. After me!’
He turned left and sped across the smooth ﬂoor of the hall. The
distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the
beat and echo of many hurrying feet behind. A shrill yell went up:
they had been seen. There was a ring and clash of steel. An arrow
whistled over Frodo’s head.
Boromir laughed. ‘They did not expect this,’ he said. ‘The ﬁre
has cut them off. We are on the wrong side!’
‘Look ahead!’ called Gandalf. ‘The Bridge is near. lt is dangerous
and narrow.’
Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the
hall the ﬂoor vanished and fell to an unknown depth. The outer door
could only be reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or
rail, that spanned the chasm with one curving spring of ﬁfty feet. It
was an ancient defence of the Dwarves against any enemy that might
capture the First Hall and the outer passages. They could only pass
across it in single ﬁle. At the brink Gandalf halted and the others
came up in a pack behind.
‘Lead the way, Gimli!’ he said. ‘Pippin and Merry next. Straight
on, and up the stair beyond the door!’
Arrows fell among them. One struck Frodo and sprang back.
Another pierced Gandalf ’s hat and stuck there like a black feather.
Frodo looked behind. Beyond the ﬁre he saw swarming black ﬁgures:
there seemed to be hundreds of orcs. They brandished spears and
scimitars which shone red as blood in the ﬁrelight. Doom, doom rolled
the drum-beats, growing louder and louder, doom, doom.
Legolas turned and set an arrow to the string, though it was a long
shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow
slipped to the ground. He gave a cry of dismay and fear. Two great
trolls appeared; they bore great slabs of stone, and ﬂung them down
to serve as gangways over the ﬁre. But it was not the trolls that had
ﬁlled the Elf with terror. The ranks of the orcs had opened, and they
crowded away, as if they themselves were afraid. Something was
coming up behind them. What it was could not be seen: it was like
a great shadow, in the middle of which was a dark form, of man-shape
maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to be in it and
to go before it.
It came to the edge of the ﬁre and the light faded as if a cloud
had bent over it. Then with a rush it leaped across the ﬁssure. The
ﬂames roared up to greet it, and wreathed about it; and a black smoke
swirled in the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it.
In its right hand was a blade like a stabbing tongue of ﬁre; in its left
it held a whip of many thongs.

330

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Ai! ai!’ wailed Legolas. ‘A Balrog! A Balrog is come!’
Gimli stared with wide eyes. ‘Durin’s Bane!’ he cried, and letting
his axe fall he covered his face.
‘A Balrog,’ muttered Gandalf. ‘Now I understand.’ He faltered
and leaned heavily on his staff. ‘What an evil fortune! And I am
already weary.’
The dark ﬁgure streaming with ﬁre raced towards them. The orcs
yelled and poured over the stone gangways. Then Boromir raised his
horn and blew. Loud the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout
of many throats under the cavernous roof. For a moment the orcs
quailed and the ﬁery shadow halted. Then the echoes died as suddenly as a ﬂame blown out by a dark wind, and the enemy advanced
again.
‘Over the bridge!’ cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. ‘Fly! This
is a foe beyond any of you. I must hold the narrow way. Fly!’ Aragorn
and Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground,
side by side, behind Gandalf at the far end of the bridge. The others
halted just within the doorway at the hall’s end, and turned, unable
to leave their leader to face the enemy alone.
The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of
the span, leaning on the staff in his left hand, but in his other hand
Glamdring gleamed, cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing
him, and the shadow about it reached out like two vast wings. It
raised the whip, and the thongs whined and cracked. Fire came from
its nostrils. But Gandalf stood ﬁrm.
‘You cannot pass,’ he said. The orcs stood still, and a dead silence
fell. ‘I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the ﬂame of Anor.
You cannot pass. The dark ﬁre will not avail you, ﬂame of Udûn.
Go back to the Shadow! You cannot pass.’
The Balrog made no answer. The ﬁre in it seemed to die, but the
darkness grew. It stepped forward slowly on to the bridge, and suddenly it drew itself up to a great height, and its wings were spread
from wall to wall; but still Gandalf could be seen, glimmering in the
gloom; he seemed small, and altogether alone: grey and bent, like a
wizened tree before the onset of a storm.
From out of the shadow a red sword leaped ﬂaming.
Glamdring glittered white in answer.
There was a ringing clash and a stab of white ﬁre. The Balrog fell
back, and its sword ﬂew up in molten fragments. The wizard swayed
on the bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still.
‘You cannot pass!’ he said.
With a bound the Balrog leaped full upon the bridge. Its whip
whirled and hissed.

ˆM
THE BRIDGE OF KHAZAD-DU

331

‘He cannot stand alone!’ cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back
along the bridge. ‘Elendil! ’ he shouted. ‘I am with you, Gandalf !’
‘Gondor!’ cried Boromir and leaped after him.
At that moment Gandalf lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote
the bridge before him. The staff broke asunder and fell from his
hand. A blinding sheet of white ﬂame sprang up. The bridge cracked.
Right at the Balrog’s feet it broke, and the stone upon which it stood
crashed into the gulf, while the rest remained, poised, quivering like
a tongue of rock thrust out into emptiness.
With a terrible cry the Balrog fell forward, and its shadow plunged
down and vanished. But even as it fell it swung its whip, and the
thongs lashed and curled about the wizard’s knees, dragging him to
the brink. He staggered and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid
into the abyss. ‘Fly, you fools!’ he cried, and was gone.
The ﬁres went out, and blank darkness fell. The Company stood
rooted with horror staring into the pit. Even as Aragorn and Boromir
came ﬂying back, the rest of the bridge cracked and fell. With a cry
Aragorn roused them.
‘Come! I will lead you now!’ he called. ‘We must obey his last
command. Follow me!’
They stumbled wildly up the great stairs beyond the door, Aragorn
leading, Boromir at the rear. At the top was a wide echoing passage.
Along this they ﬂed. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then
he found that he himself was weeping as he ran. Doom, doom, doom
the drum-beats rolled behind, mournful now and slow; doom!
They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the
roof. They ran swifter. They passed into a hall, bright with daylight
from its high windows in the east. They ﬂed across it. Through its
huge broken doors they passed, and suddenly before them the Great
Gates opened, an arch of blazing light.
There was a guard of orcs crouching in the shadows behind the great
door-posts towering on either side, but the gates were shattered and
cast down. Aragorn smote to the ground the captain that stood in his
path, and the rest ﬂed in terror of his wrath. The Company swept past
them and took no heed of them. Out of the Gates they ran and sprang
down the huge and age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria.
Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the
wind on their faces.
They did not halt until they were out of bowshot from the walls.
Dimrill Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains
lay upon it, but eastwards there was a golden light on the land. It
was but one hour after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were
white and high.

332

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

They looked back. Dark yawned the archway of the Gates under
the mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow
drum-beats: doom. A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was
to be seen; the dale all around was empty. Doom. Grief at last wholly
overcame them, and they wept long: some standing and silent, some
cast upon the ground. Doom, doom. The drum-beats faded.

Chapter 6
´ RIEN
LOTHLO
‘Alas! I fear we cannot stay here longer,’ said Aragorn. He looked
towards the mountains and held up his sword. ‘Farewell, Gandalf !’
he cried. ‘Did I not say to you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware?
Alas that I spoke true! What hope have we without you?’
He turned to the Company. ‘We must do without hope,’ he said.
‘At least we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no
more! Come! We have a long road, and much to do.’
They rose and looked about them. Northward the dale ran up
into a glen of shadows between two great arms of the mountains,
above which three white peaks were shining: Celebdil, Fanuidhol,
Caradhras, the Mountains of Moria. At the head of the glen a torrent
ﬂowed like a white lace over an endless ladder of short falls, and a
mist of foam hung in the air about the mountains’ feet.
‘Yonder is the Dimrill Stair,’ said Aragorn, pointing to the falls.
‘Down the deep-cloven way that climbs beside the torrent we should
have come, if fortune had been kinder.’
‘Or Caradhras less cruel,’ said Gimli. ‘There he stands smiling in
the sun!’ He shook his ﬁst at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks
and turned away.
To the east the outﬂung arm of the mountains marched to a
sudden end, and far lands could be descried beyond them, wide and
vague. To the south the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far
as sight could reach. Less than a mile away, and a little below them,
for they still stood high up on the west side of the dale, there lay a
mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a great spear-head thrust
deep into the northern glen; but its southern end was beyond the
shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet its waters were dark: a deep blue
like clear evening sky seen from a lamp-lit room. Its face was still
and unrufﬂed. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all
sides to its bare unbroken rim.
‘There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled-zâram!’ said Gimli sadly.
‘I remember that he said: ‘‘May you have joy of the sight! But we
cannot linger there.’’ Now long shall I journey ere I have joy again.
It is I that must hasten away, and he that must remain.’
The Company now went down the road from the Gates. It was
rough and broken, fading to a winding track between heather and
whin that thrust amid the cracking stones. But still it could be seen

334

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

that once long ago a great paved way had wound upwards from the
lowlands to the Dwarf-kingdom. In places there were ruined works
of stone beside the path, and mounds of green topped with slender
birches, or ﬁr-trees sighing in the wind. An eastward bend led them
hard by the sward of Mirrormere, and there not far from the roadside
stood a single column broken at the top.
‘That is Durin’s Stone!’ cried Gimli. ‘I cannot pass without turning
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale!’
‘Be swift then!’ said Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.
‘The Sun sinks early. The Orcs will not, maybe, come out till after
dusk, but we must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost
spent, and it will be dark tonight.’
‘Come with me, Frodo!’ cried the dwarf, springing from the road.
‘I would not have you go without seeing Kheled-zâram.’ He ran down
the long green slope. Frodo followed slowly, drawn by the still blue
water in spite of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind.
Beside the standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It was
cracked and weather-worn, and the faint runes upon its side could
not be read. ‘This pillar marks the spot where Durin ﬁrst looked in
the Mirrormere,’ said the dwarf. ‘Let us look ourselves once, ere
we go!’
They stooped over the dark water. At ﬁrst they could see nothing.
Then slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored
in a profound blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white ﬂame
above them; beyond there was a space of sky. There like jewels sunk
in the deep shone glinting stars, though sunlight was in the sky above.
Of their own stooping forms no shadow could be seen.
‘O Kheled-zâram fair and wonderful!’ said Gimli. ‘There lies the
Crown of Durin till he wakes. Farewell!’ He bowed, and turned away,
and hastened back up the greensward to the road again.
‘What did you see?’ said Pippin to Sam, but Sam was too deep in
thought to answer.
The road now turned south and went quickly downwards, running
out from between the arms of the dale. Some way below the mere
they came on a deep well of water, clear as crystal, from which a
freshet fell over a stone lip and ran glistening and gurgling down a
steep rocky channel.
‘Here is the spring from which the Silverlode rises,’ said Gimli.
‘Do not drink of it! It is icy cold.’
‘Soon it becomes a swift river, and it gathers water from many
other mountain-streams,’ said Aragorn. ‘Our road leads beside it for
many miles. For I shall take you by the road that Gandalf chose, and
ﬁrst I hope to come to the woods where the Silverlode ﬂows into the

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

335

Great River – out yonder.’ They looked as he pointed, and before
them they could see the stream leaping down to the trough of the
valley, and then running on and away into the lower lands, until it
was lost in a golden haze.
‘There lie the woods of Lothlórien!’ said Legolas. ‘That is the
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the
trees of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn
to gold. Not till the spring comes and the new green opens do they
fall, and then the boughs are laden with yellow ﬂowers; and the ﬂoor
of the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillars are of
silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs
in Mirkwood say. My heart would be glad if I were beneath the eaves
of that wood, and it were springtime!’
‘My heart will be glad, even in the winter,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it
lies many miles away. Let us hasten!’
For some time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with the
others; but Aragorn was leading them at a great pace, and after a
while they lagged behind. They had eaten nothing since the early
morning. Sam’s cut was burning like ﬁre, and his head felt light. In
spite of the shining sun the wind seemed chill after the warm darkness
of Moria. He shivered. Frodo felt every step more painful and he
gasped for breath.
At last Legolas turned, and seeing them now far behind, he spoke
to Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to
Boromir to come with him.
‘I am sorry, Frodo!’ he cried, full of concern. ‘So much has happened this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten
that you were hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have
done nothing to ease you, as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria
were after us. Come now! A little further on there is a place where
we can rest for a little. There I will do what I can for you. Come,
Boromir! We will carry them.’
Soon afterwards they came upon another stream that ran down
from the west, and joined its bubbling water with the hurrying
Silverlode. Together they plunged over a fall of green-hued stone,
and foamed down into a dell. About it stood ﬁr-trees, short and bent,
and its sides were steep and clothed with harts-tongue and shrubs of
whortle-berry. At the bottom there was a level space through which
the stream ﬂowed noisily over shining pebbles. Here they rested. It
was now nearly three hours after noon, and they had come only a
few miles from the Gates. Already the sun was westering.
While Gimli and the two younger hobbits kindled a ﬁre of brushand ﬁr-wood, and drew water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam’s

336

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

wound was not deep, but it looked ugly, and Aragorn’s face was
grave as he examined it. After a moment he looked up with relief.
‘Good luck, Sam!’ he said. ‘Many have received worse than this
in payment for the slaying of their ﬁrst orc. The cut is not poisoned,
as the wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should heal well when
I have tended it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.’
He opened his pouch and drew out some withered leaves. ‘They
are dry, and some of their virtue has gone,’ he said, ‘but here I have
still some of the leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weathertop.
Crush one in the water, and wash the wound clean, and I will bind
it. Now it is your turn, Frodo!’
‘I am all right,’ said Frodo, reluctant to have his garments touched.
‘All I needed was some food and a little rest.’
‘No!’ said Aragorn. ‘We must have a look and see what the hammer
and the anvil have done to you. I still marvel that you are alive at
all.’ Gently he stripped off Frodo’s old jacket and worn tunic, and
gave a gasp of wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered before his eyes like the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully
he took it off and held it up, and the gems on it glittered like stars,
and the sound of the shaken rings was like the tinkle of rain in a
pool.
‘Look, my friends!’ he called. ‘Here’s a pretty hobbit-skin to wrap
an elven-princeling in! If it were known that hobbits had such hides,
all the hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.’
‘And all the arrows of all the hunters in the world would be in
vain,’ said Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. ‘It is a mithril-coat.
Mithril! I have never seen or heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat
that Gandalf spoke of ? Then he undervalued it. But it was well
given!’
‘I have often wondered what you and Bilbo were doing, so close
in his little room,’ said Merry. ‘Bless the old hobbit! I love him more
than ever. I hope we get a chance of telling him about it!’
There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo’s right side and
breast. Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one
point the rings had been driven through it into the ﬂesh. Frodo’s left
side also was scored and bruised where he had been hurled against
the wall. While the others set the food ready, Aragorn bathed the
hurts with water in which athelas was steeped. The pungent fragrance
ﬁlled the dell, and all those who stooped over the steaming water felt
refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the pain leave him, and
his breath grew easy: though he was stiff and sore to the touch for
many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.
‘The mail is marvellously light,’ he said. ‘Put it on again, if you
can bear it. My heart is glad to know that you have such a coat. Do

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

337

not lay it aside, even in sleep, unless fortune brings you where you
are safe for a while; and that will seldom chance while your quest
lasts.’
When they had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They put
out the ﬁre and hid all traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell
they took to the road again. They had not gone far before the sun
sank behind the westward heights and great shadows crept down the
mountain-sides. Dusk veiled their feet, and mist rose in the hollows.
Away in the east the evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of
distant plain and wood. Sam and Frodo now feeling eased and greatly
refreshed were able to go at a fair pace, and with only one brief halt
Aragorn led the Company on for nearly three more hours.
It was dark. Deep night had fallen. There were many clear stars,
but the fast-waning moon would not be seen till late. Gimli and
Frodo were at the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for
any sound upon the road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence.
‘Not a sound but the wind,’ he said. ‘There are no goblins near,
or my ears are made of wood. It is to be hoped that the Orcs will be
content with driving us from Moria. And maybe that was all their
purpose, and they had nothing else to do with us – with the Ring.
Though Orcs will often pursue foes for many leagues into the plain,
if they have a fallen captain to avenge.’
Frodo did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade was dull.
Yet he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon as the
shadows had fallen about them and the road behind was dim, he had
heard again the quick patter of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned
swiftly. There were two tiny gleams of light behind, or for a moment
he thought he saw them, but at once they slipped aside and vanished.
‘What is it?’ said the dwarf.
‘I don’t know,’ answered Frodo. ‘I thought I heard feet, and I
thought I saw a light – like eyes. I have thought so often, since we
ﬁrst entered Moria.’
Gimli halted and stooped to the ground. ‘I hear nothing but the
night-speech of plant and stone,’ he said. ‘Come! Let us hurry! The
others are out of sight.’
The night-wind blew chill up the valley to meet them. Before them
a wide grey shadow loomed, and they heard an endless rustle of
leaves like poplars in the breeze.
‘Lothlórien!’ cried Legolas. ‘Lothlórien! We have come to the eaves
of the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter!’
Under the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the
road and stream that ran suddenly beneath their spreading boughs.

338

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

In the dim light of the stars their stems were grey, and their quivering
leaves a hint of fallow gold.
‘Lothlórien!’ said Aragorn. ‘Glad I am to hear again the wind in
the trees! We are still little more than ﬁve leagues from the Gates,
but we can go no further. Here let us hope that the virtue of the
Elves will keep us tonight from the peril that comes behind.’
‘If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,’ said Gimli.
‘It is long since any of my own folk journeyed hither back to the
land whence we wandered in ages long ago,’ said Legolas, ‘but we
hear that Lórien is not yet deserted, for there is a secret power here
that holds evil from the land. Nevertheless its folk are seldom seen,
and maybe they dwell now deep in the woods and far from the
northern border.’
‘Indeed deep in the wood they dwell,’ said Aragorn, and sighed
as if some memory stirred in him. ‘We must fend for ourselves tonight.
We will go forward a short way, until the trees are all about us, and
then we will turn aside from the path and seek a place to rest in.’
He stepped forward; but Boromir stood irresolute and did not
follow. ‘Is there no other way?’ he said.
‘What other fairer way would you desire?’ said Aragorn.
‘A plain road, though it led through a hedge of swords,’ said
Boromir. ‘By strange paths has this Company been led, and so far
to evil fortune. Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria,
to our loss. And now we must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But
of that perilous land we have heard in Gondor, and it is said that
few come out who once go in; and of that few none have escaped
unscathed.’
‘Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe you will
speak the truth,’ said Aragorn. ‘But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir,
if in the city of those who once were wise they now speak evil of
Lothlórien. Believe what you will, there is no other way for us – unless
you would go back to Moria-gate, or scale the pathless mountains, or
swim the Great River all alone.’
‘Then lead on!’ said Boromir. ‘But it is perilous.’
‘Perilous indeed,’ said Aragorn, ‘fair and perilous; but only evil
need fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me!’
They had gone little more than a mile into the forest when they
came upon another stream ﬂowing down swiftly from the tree-clad
slopes that climbed back westward towards the mountains. They
heard it splashing over a fall away among the shadows on their right.
Its dark hurrying waters ran across the path before them, and joined
the Silverlode in a swirl of dim pools among the roots of trees.
‘Here is Nimrodel!’ said Legolas. ‘Of this stream the Silvan Elves

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

339

made many songs long ago, and still we sing them in the North,
remembering the rainbow on its falls, and the golden ﬂowers that
ﬂoated in its foam. All is dark now and the Bridge of Nimrodel is
broken down. I will bathe my feet, for it is said that the water is
healing to the weary.’ He went forward and climbed down the deepcloven bank and stepped into the stream.
‘Follow me!’ he cried. ‘The water is not deep. Let us wade across!
On the further bank we can rest, and the sound of the falling water
may bring us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.’
One by one they climbed down and followed Legolas. For a
moment Frodo stood near the brink and let the water ﬂow over his
tired feet. It was cold but its touch was clean, and as he went on and
it mounted to his knees, he felt that the stain of travel and all weariness
was washed from his limbs.
When all the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate
a little food; and Legolas told them tales of Lothlórien that the Elves
of Mirkwood still kept in their hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon
the meadows by the Great River before the world was grey.
At length a silence fell, and they heard the music of the waterfall
running sweetly in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he could
hear a voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water.
‘Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel?’ asked Legolas. ‘I will sing
you a song of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same name as the
stream beside which she lived long ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this is how it runs in the Westron Speech, as some
in Rivendell now sing it.’ In a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the
rustle of the leaves above them he began:
An Elven-maid there was of old,
A shining star by day:
Her mantle white was hemmed with gold,
Her shoes of silver-grey.
A star was bound upon her brows,
A light was on her hair
As sun upon the golden boughs
In Lórien the fair.
Her hair was long, her limbs were white,
And fair she was and free;
And in the wind she went as light
As leaf of linden-tree.

340

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Beside the falls of Nimrodel,
By water clear and cool,
Her voice as falling silver fell
Into the shining pool.
Where now she wanders none can tell,
In sunlight or in shade;
For lost of yore was Nimrodel
And in the mountains strayed.
The elven-ship in haven grey
Beneath the mountain-lee
Awaited her for many a day
Beside the roaring sea.
A wind by night in Northern lands
Arose, and loud it cried,
And drove the ship from elven-strands
Across the streaming tide.
When dawn came dim the land was lost,
The mountains sinking grey
Beyond the heaving waves that tossed
Their plumes of blinding spray.
Amroth beheld the fading shore
Now low beyond the swell,
And cursed the faithless ship that bore
Him far from Nimrodel.
Of old he was an Elven-king,
A lord of tree and glen,
When golden were the boughs in spring
In fair Lothlórien.
From helm to sea they saw him leap,
As arrow from the string,
And dive into the water deep,
As mew upon the wing.
The wind was in his ﬂowing hair,
The foam about him shone;
Afar they saw him strong and fair
Go riding like a swan.

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

341

But from the West has come no word,
And on the Hither Shore
No tidings Elven-folk have heard
Of Amroth evermore.
The voice of Legolas faltered, and the song ceased. ‘I cannot sing
any more,’ he said. ‘That is but a part, for I have forgotten much. It
is long and sad, for it tells how sorrow came upon Lothlórien, Lórien
of the Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened evil in the mountains.’
‘But the Dwarves did not make the evil,’ said Gimli.
‘I said not so; yet evil came,’ answered Legolas sadly. ‘Then many
of the Elves of Nimrodel’s kindred left their dwellings and departed,
and she was lost far in the South, in the passes of the White Mountains; and she came not to the ship where Amroth her lover waited
for her. But in the spring when the wind is in the new leaves the
echo of her voice may still be heard by the falls that bear her name.
And when the wind is in the South the voice of Amroth comes
up from the sea; for Nimrodel ﬂows into Silverlode, that Elves call
Celebrant, and Celebrant into Anduin the Great, and Anduin ﬂows
into the Bay of Belfalas whence the Elves of Lórien set sail. But
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth came ever back.
‘It is told that she had a house built in the branches of a tree that
grew near the falls; for that was the custom of the Elves of Lórien,
to dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Therefore they were
called the Galadhrim, the Tree-people. Deep in their forest the trees
are very great. The people of the woods did not delve in the ground
like Dwarves, nor build strong places of stone before the Shadow
came.’
‘And even in these latter days dwelling in the trees might be
thought safer than sitting on the ground,’ said Gimli. He looked
across the stream to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then
up into the roof of dark boughs above.
‘Your words bring good counsel, Gimli,’ said Aragorn. ‘We cannot
build a house, but tonight we will do as the Galadhrim and seek
refuge in the tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside the road
already longer than was wise.’
The Company now turned aside from the path, and went into the
shadow of the deeper woods, westward along the mountain-stream
away from Silverlode. Not far from the falls of Nimrodel they found
a cluster of trees, some of which overhung the stream. Their great grey
trunks were of mighty girth, but their height could not be guessed.
‘I will climb up,’ said Legolas. ‘I am at home among trees, by root
or bough, though these trees are of a kind strange to me, save as a

342

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

name in song. Mellyrn they are called, and are those that bear the
yellow blossom, but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what
is their shape and way of growth.’
‘Whatever it may be,’ said Pippin, ‘they will be marvellous trees
indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot
sleep on a perch!’
‘Then dig a hole in the ground,’ said Legolas, ‘if that is more after
the fashion of your kind. But you must dig swift and deep, if you
wish to hide from Orcs.’ He sprang lightly up from the ground and
caught a branch that grew from the trunk high above his head. But
even as he swung there for a moment, a voice spoke suddenly from
the tree-shadows above him.
‘Daro!’ it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to
earth in surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree.
‘Stand still!’ he whispered to the others. ‘Do not move or speak!’
There was a sound of soft laughter over their heads, and then
another clear voice spoke in an elven-tongue. Frodo could understand
little of what was said, for the speech that the Silvan folk east of
the mountains used among themselves was unlike that of the West.
Legolas looked up and answered in the same language.*
‘Who are they, and what do they say?’ asked Merry.
‘They’re Elves,’ said Sam. ‘Can’t you hear their voices?’
‘Yes, they are Elves,’ said Legolas; ‘and they say that you breathe
so loud that they could shoot you in the dark.’ Sam hastily put his
hand over his mouth. ‘But they say also that you need have no fear.
They have been aware of us for a long while. They heard my voice
across the Nimrodel, and knew that I was one of their Northern
kindred, and therefore they did not hinder our crossing; and afterwards they heard my song. Now they bid me climb up with Frodo;
for they seem to have had some tidings of him and of our journey.
The others they ask to wait a little, and to keep watch at the foot of
the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.’
Out of the shadows a ladder was let down: it was made of rope,
silver-grey and glimmering in the dark, and though it looked slender
it proved strong enough to bear many men. Legolas ran lightly up,
and Frodo followed slowly; behind came Sam trying not to breathe
loudly. The branches of the mallorn-tree grew out nearly straight
from the trunk, and then swept upward; but near the top the main
stem divided into a crown of many boughs, and among these they
found that there had been built a wooden platform, or ﬂet as such
things were called in those days: the Elves called it a talan. It was
* See note in Appendix F: Of the Elves.

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

343

reached by a round hole in the centre through which the ladder
passed.
When Frodo came at last up on to the ﬂet he found Legolas seated
with three other Elves. They were clad in shadowy-grey, and could
not be seen among the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They
stood up, and one of them uncovered a small lamp that gave out a
slender silver beam. He held it up, looking at Frodo’s face, and Sam’s.
Then he shut off the light again, and spoke words of welcome in his
elven-tongue. Frodo spoke haltingly in return.
‘Welcome!’ the Elf then said again in the Common Language,
speaking slowly. ‘We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we
dwell now in the heart of the forest, and do not willingly have dealings
with any other folk. Even our own kindred in the North are sundered
from us. But there are some of us still who go abroad for the gathering
of news and the watching of our enemies, and they speak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my name. My brothers,
Rúmil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue.
‘But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers
of Elrond passed by Lórien on their way home up the Dimrill Stair.
We had not heard of – hobbits, of halﬂings, for many a long year,
and did not know that any yet dwelt in Middle-earth. You do not
look evil! And since you come with an Elf of our kindred, we are
willing to befriend you, as Elrond asked; though it is not our custom
to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here tonight.
How many are you?’
‘Eight,’ said Legolas. ‘Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of
whom, Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.’
‘The name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lórien,’ said
Haldir, ‘and he has the favour of the Lady. All then is well. But you
have yet spoken only of seven.’
‘The eighth is a dwarf,’ said Legolas.
‘A dwarf !’ said Haldir. ‘That is not well. We have not had dealings
with the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in
our land. I cannot allow him to pass.’
‘But he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of Dáin’s trusty people,
and friendly to Elrond,’ said Frodo. ‘Elrond himself chose him to be
one of our companions, and he has been brave and faithful.’
The Elves spoke together in soft voices, and questioned Legolas
in their own tongue. ‘Very good,’ said Haldir at last. ‘We will do
this, though it is against our liking. If Aragorn and Legolas will guard
him, and answer for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold
through Lothlórien.
‘But now we must debate no longer. Your folk must not remain
on the ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since

344

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

we saw a great troop of Orcs going north towards Moria, along the
skirts of the mountains, many days ago. Wolves are howling on the
wood’s borders. If you have indeed come from Moria, the peril cannot
be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go on.
‘The four hobbits shall climb up here and stay with us – we do
not fear them! There is another talan in the next tree. There the
others must take refuge. You, Legolas, must answer to us for them.
Call us, if anything is amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf !’
Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir’s message;
and soon afterwards Merry and Pippin clambered up on to the high
ﬂet. They were out of breath and seemed rather scared.
‘There!’ said Merry panting. ‘We have lugged up your blankets as
well as our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of our baggage in a
deep drift of leaves.’
‘You had no need of your burdens,’ said Haldir. ‘It is cold in the
tree-tops in winter, though the wind tonight is in the South; but we
have food and drink to give you that will drive away the night-chill,
and we have skins and cloaks to spare.’
The hobbits accepted this second (and far better) supper very
gladly. Then they wrapped themselves warmly, not only in the furcloaks of the Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and tried to
go to sleep. But weary as they were only Sam found that easy to do.
Hobbits do not like heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when
they have any stairs. The ﬂet was not at all to their liking as a bedroom.
It had no walls, not even a rail; only on one side was there a light
plaited screen, which could be moved and ﬁxed in different places
according to the wind.
Pippin went on talking for a while. ‘I hope, if I do go to sleep in
this bird-loft, that I shan’t roll off,’ he said.
‘Once I do get to sleep,’ said Sam, ‘I shall go on sleeping, whether
I roll off or no. And the less said, the sooner I’ll drop off, if you take
my meaning.’
Frodo lay for some time awake, and looked up at the stars glinting
through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his side
long before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see the grey
forms of two elves sitting motionless with their arms about their
knees, speaking in whispers. The other had gone down to take up
his watch on one of the lower branches. At last lulled by the wind
in the boughs above, and the sweet murmur of the falls of Nimrodel
below, Frodo fell asleep with the song of Legolas running in his mind.
Late in the night he woke. The other hobbits were asleep. The
Elves were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

345

leaves. The wind was still. A little way off he heard a harsh laugh
and the tread of many feet on the ground below. There was a ring
of metal. The sounds died slowly away, and seemed to go southward,
on into the wood.
A head appeared suddenly through the hole in the ﬂet. Frodo sat
up in alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards
the hobbits.
‘What is it?’ said Frodo.
‘Yrch!’ said the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the ﬂet the
rope-ladder rolled up.
‘Orcs!’ said Frodo. ‘What are they doing?’ But the Elf had gone.
There were no more sounds. Even the leaves were silent, and the
very falls seemed to be hushed. Frodo sat and shivered in his wraps.
He was thankful that they had not been caught on the ground; but
he felt that the trees offered little protection, except concealment.
Orcs were as keen as hounds on a scent, it was said, but they could
also climb. He drew out Sting: it ﬂashed and glittered like a blue
ﬂame; and then slowly faded again and grew dull. In spite of the
fading of his sword the feeling of immediate danger did not leave
Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and crawled to the opening
and peered down. He was almost certain that he could hear stealthy
movements at the tree’s foot far below.
Not Elves; for the woodland folk were altogether noiseless in their
movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like snifﬁng; and something seemed to be scrabbling on the bark of the tree-trunk. He stared
down into the dark, holding his breath.
Something was now climbing slowly, and its breath came like a
soft hissing through closed teeth. Then coming up, close to the stem,
Frodo saw two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking.
Suddenly they turned away, and a shadowy ﬁgure slipped round the
trunk of the tree and vanished.
Immediately afterwards Haldir came climbing swiftly up through
the branches. ‘There was something in this tree that I have never
seen before,’ he said. ‘It was not an orc. It ﬂed as soon as I touched
the tree-stem. It seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees,
or I might have thought that it was one of you hobbits.
‘I did not shoot, for I dared not arouse any cries: we cannot
risk battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They crossed the
Nimrodel – curse their foul feet in its clean water! – and went on
down the old road beside the river. They seemed to pick up some
scent, and they searched the ground for a while near the place where
you halted. The three of us could not challenge a hundred, so we
went ahead and spoke with feigned voices, leading them on into the
wood.

346

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Orophin has now gone in haste back to our dwellings to warn
our people. None of the Orcs will ever return out of Lórien. And
there will be many Elves hidden on the northern border before
another night falls. But you must take the road south as soon as it
is fully light.’
Day came pale from the East. As the light grew it ﬁltered through
the yellow leaves of the mallorn, and it seemed to the hobbits that
the early sun of a cool summer’s morning was shining. Pale-blue sky
peeped among the moving branches. Looking through an opening
on the south side of the ﬂet Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode
lying like a sea of fallow gold tossing gently in the breeze.
The morning was still young and cold when the Company set out
again, guided now by Haldir and his brother Rúmil. ‘Farewell, sweet
Nimrodel!’ cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and caught a gleam of
white foam among the grey tree-stems. ‘Farewell,’ he said. It seemed
to him that he would never hear again a running water so beautiful,
for ever blending its innumerable notes in an endless changeful music.
They went back to the path that still went on along the west side
of the Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There
were the prints of orc-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside
into the trees and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows.
‘There is one of my people yonder across the stream,’ he said,
‘though you may not see him.’ He gave a call like the low whistle of
a bird, and out of a thicket of young trees an Elf stepped, clad in
grey, but with his hood thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the
morning sun. Haldir skilfully cast over the stream a coil of grey rope,
and he caught it and bound the end about a tree near the bank.
‘Celebrant is already a strong stream here, as you see,’ said Haldir,
‘and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We do not set foot
in it so far north, unless we must. But in these days of watchfulness
we do not make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!’ He made
his end of the rope fast about another tree, and then ran lightly along
it, over the river and back again, as if he were on a road.
‘I can walk this path,’ said Legolas; ‘but the others have not this
skill. Must they swim?’
‘No!’ said Haldir. ‘We have two more ropes. We will fasten them
above the other, one shoulder-high, and another half-high, and holding these the strangers should be able to cross with care.’
When this slender bridge had been made, the Company passed
over, some cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of the hobbits
Pippin proved the best for he was sure-footed, and he walked over
quickly, holding only with one hand; but he kept his eyes on the
bank ahead and did not look down. Sam shufﬂed along, clutching

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

347

hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water as if it was a
chasm in the mountains.
He breathed with relief when he was safely across. ‘Live and learn!
as my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening, not
of roosting like a bird, nor of trying to walk like a spider. Not even
my uncle Andy ever did a trick like that!’
When at length all the Company was gathered on the east bank
of the Silverlode, the Elves untied the ropes and coiled two of them.
Rúmil, who had remained on the other side, drew back the last one,
slung it on his shoulder, and with a wave of his hand went away,
back to Nimrodel to keep watch.
‘Now, friends,’ said Haldir, ‘you have entered the Naith of Lórien,
or the Gore, as you would say, for it is the land that lies like a
spearhead between the arms of Silverlode and Anduin the Great. We
allow no strangers to spy out the secrets of the Naith. Few indeed
are permitted even to set foot there.
‘As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf.
The others may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our
dwellings, down in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters.’
This was not at all to the liking of Gimli. ‘The agreement was
made without my consent,’ he said. ‘I will not walk blindfold, like a
beggar or a prisoner. And I am no spy. My folk have never had
dealings with any of the servants of the Enemy. Neither have we
done harm to the Elves. I am no more likely to betray you than
Legolas, or any other of my companions.’
‘I do not doubt you,’ said Haldir. ‘Yet this is our law. I am not
the master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I have done much in
letting you set foot over Celebrant.’
Gimli was obstinate. He planted his feet ﬁrmly apart, and laid his
hand upon the haft of his axe. ‘I will go forward free,’ he said, ‘or I
will go back and seek my own land, where I am known to be true of
word, though I perish alone in the wilderness.’
‘You cannot go back,’ said Haldir sternly. ‘Now you have come
thus far, you must be brought before the Lord and the Lady. They
shall judge you, to hold you or to give you leave, as they will. You
cannot cross the rivers again, and behind you there are now secret
sentinels that you cannot pass. You would be slain before you saw
them.’
Gimli drew his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion bent
their bows. ‘A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks!’ said Legolas.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘If I am still to lead this Company, you
must do as I bid. It is hard upon the Dwarf to be thus singled out.
We will all be blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it
will make the journey slow and dull.’

348

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gimli laughed suddenly. ‘A merry troop of fools we shall look!
Will Haldir lead us all on a string, like many blind beggars with one
dog? But I will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.’
‘I am an Elf and a kinsman here,’ said Legolas, becoming angry
in his turn.
‘Now let us cry: ‘‘a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!’’ ’ said
Aragorn. ‘But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes,
Haldir!’
‘I shall claim full amends for every fall and stubbed toe, if you do
not lead us well,’ said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.
‘You will have no claim,’ said Haldir. ‘I shall lead you well, and
the paths are smooth and straight.’
‘Alas for the folly of these days!’ said Legolas. ‘Here all are enemies
of the one Enemy, and yet I must walk blind, while the sun is merry
in the woodland under leaves of gold!’
‘Folly it may seem,’ said Haldir. ‘Indeed in nothing is the power
of the Dark Lord more clearly shown than in the estrangement that
divides all those who still oppose him. Yet so little faith and trust do
we ﬁnd now in the world beyond Lothlórien, unless maybe in Rivendell, that we dare not by our own trust endanger our land. We live
now upon an island amid many perils, and our hands are more often
upon the bowstring than upon the harp.
‘The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more;
for the Shadow has crept northward all about us. Some speak of
departing, yet for that it already seems too late. The mountains to
the west are growing evil; to the east the lands are waste, and full of
Sauron’s creatures; and it is rumoured that we cannot now safely
pass southward through Rohan, and the mouths of the Great River
are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come to the shores of
the Sea, we should ﬁnd no longer any shelter there. It is said that
there are still havens of the High Elves, but they are far north and
west, beyond the land of the Halﬂings. But where that may be, though
the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.’
‘You ought at least to guess, since you have seen us,’ said Merry.
‘There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire, where Hobbits
live.’
‘Happy folk are Hobbits to dwell near the shores of the sea!’ said
Haldir. ‘It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet
still we remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.’
‘I cannot,’ said Merry. ‘I have never seen them. I have never been
out of my own land before. And if I had known what the world
outside was like, I don’t think I should have had the heart to leave
it.’
‘Not even to see fair Lothlórien?’ said Haldir. ‘The world is indeed

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

349

full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; but still there is
much that is fair, and though in all lands love is now mingled with
grief, it grows perhaps the greater.
‘Some there are among us who sing that the Shadow will draw
back, and peace shall come again. Yet I do not believe that the world
about us will ever again be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun
as it was aforetime. For the Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a
truce, in which they may pass to the Sea unhindered and leave the
Middle-earth for ever. Alas for Lothlórien that I love! It would be a
poor life in a land where no mallorn grew. But if there are mallorntrees beyond the Great Sea, none have reported it.’
As they spoke thus, the Company ﬁled slowly along the paths in
the wood, led by Haldir, while the other Elf walked behind. They
felt the ground beneath their feet smooth and soft, and after a while
they walked more freely, without fear of hurt or fall. Being deprived
of sight, Frodo found his hearing and other senses sharpened. He
could smell the trees and the trodden grass. He could hear many
different notes in the rustle of the leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on his right, and the thin clear voices of birds high in the
sky. He felt the sun upon his face and hands when they passed
through an open glade.
As soon as he set foot upon the far bank of Silverlode a strange
feeling had come upon him, and it deepened as he walked on into
the Naith: it seemed to him that he had stepped over a bridge of
time into a corner of the Elder Days, and was now walking in a world
that was no more. In Rivendell there was memory of ancient things;
in Lórien the ancient things still lived on in the waking world. Evil
had been seen and heard there, sorrow had been known; the Elves
feared and distrusted the world outside: wolves were howling on the
wood’s borders: but on the land of Lórien no shadow lay.
All that day the Company marched on, until they felt the cool
evening come and heard the early night-wind whispering among
many leaves. Then they rested and slept without fear upon the
ground; for their guides would not permit them to unbind their eyes,
and they could not climb. In the morning they went on again, walking
without haste. At noon they halted, and Frodo was aware that they
had passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard the sound
of many voices all around him.
A marching host of Elves had come up silently: they were hastening
towards the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria;
and they brought news, some of which Haldir reported. The marauding orcs had been waylaid and almost all destroyed; the remnant had
ﬂed westward towards the mountains, and were being pursued. A

350

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

strange creature also had been seen, running with bent back and with
hands near the ground, like a beast and yet not of beast-shape. It
had eluded capture, and they had not shot it, not knowing whether
it was good or ill, and it had vanished down the Silverlode southward.
‘Also,’ said Haldir, ‘they bring me a message from the Lord and
Lady of the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf
Gimli. It seems that the Lady knows who and what is each member
of your Company. New messages have come from Rivendell perhaps.’
He removed the bandage ﬁrst from Gimli’s eyes. ‘Your pardon!’
he said, bowing low. ‘Look on us now with friendly eyes! Look and
be glad, for you are the ﬁrst dwarf to behold the trees of the Naith
of Lórien since Durin’s Day!’
When his eyes were in turn uncovered, Frodo looked up and
caught his breath. They were standing in an open space. To the left
stood a great mound, covered with a sward of grass as green as
Springtime in the Elder Days. Upon it, as a double crown, grew two
circles of trees: the outer had bark of snowy white, and were leaﬂess
but beautiful in their shapely nakedness; the inner were mallorn-trees
of great height, still arrayed in pale gold. High amid the branches of
a towering tree that stood in the centre of all there gleamed a white
ﬂet. At the feet of the trees, and all about the green hillsides the grass
was studded with small golden ﬂowers shaped like stars. Among
them, nodding on slender stalks, were other ﬂowers, white and palest
green: they glimmered as a mist amid the rich hue of the grass. Over
all the sky was blue, and the sun of afternoon glowed upon the hill
and cast long green shadows beneath the trees.
‘Behold! You are come to Cerin Amroth,’ said Haldir. ‘For this
is the heart of the ancient realm as it was long ago, and here is the
mound of Amroth, where in happier days his high house was built.
Here ever bloom the winter ﬂowers in the unfading grass: the yellow
elanor, and the pale niphredil. Here we will stay awhile, and come to
the city of the Galadhrim at dusk.’
The others cast themselves down upon the fragrant grass, but
Frodo stood awhile still lost in wonder. It seemed to him that he had
stepped through a high window that looked on a vanished world. A
light was upon it for which his language had no name. All that he
saw was shapely, but the shapes seemed at once clear cut, as if they
had been ﬁrst conceived and drawn at the uncovering of his eyes,
and ancient as if they had endured for ever. He saw no colour but
those he knew, gold and white and blue and green, but they were
fresh and poignant, as if he had at that moment ﬁrst perceived them
and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter here no
heart could mourn for summer or for spring. No blemish or sickness

´ RIEN
LOTHLO

351

or deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth. On
the land of Lórien there was no stain.
He turned and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking
round with a puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as if he was not
sure that he was awake. ‘It’s sunlight and bright day, right enough,’ he
said. ‘I thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is
more Elvish than anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was inside
a song, if you take my meaning.’
Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning
of both thought and word. He smiled. ‘You feel the power of the
Lady of the Galadhrim,’ he said. ‘Would it please you to climb with
me up Cerin Amroth?’
They followed him as he stepped lightly up the grass-clad slopes.
Though he walked and breathed, and about him living leaves and
ﬂowers were stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo
felt that he was in a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall
into forgetfulness. When he had gone and passed again into the outer
world, still Frodo the wanderer from the Shire would walk there,
upon the grass among elanor and niphredil in fair Lothlórien.
They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the South
Wind blew upon Cerin Amroth and sighed among the branches.
Frodo stood still, hearing far off great seas upon beaches that had
long ago been washed away, and sea-birds crying whose race had
perished from the earth.
Haldir had gone on and was now climbing to the high ﬂet. As
Frodo prepared to follow him, he laid his hand upon the tree beside
the ladder: never before had he been so suddenly and so keenly aware
of the feel and texture of a tree’s skin and of the life within it. He
felt a delight in wood and the touch of it, neither as forester nor as
carpenter; it was the delight of the living tree itself.
As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his
hand and turned him towards the South. ‘Look this way ﬁrst!’ he
said.
Frodo looked and saw, still at some distance, a hill of many mighty
trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out
of it, it seemed to him that the power and light came that held all
the land in sway. He longed suddenly to ﬂy like a bird to rest in the
green city. Then he looked eastward and saw all the land of Lórien
running down to the pale gleam of Anduin, the Great River. He lifted
his eyes across the river and all the light went out, and he was back
again in the world he knew. Beyond the river the land appeared ﬂat
and empty, formless and vague, until far away it rose again like a
wall, dark and drear. The sun that lay on Lothlórien had no power
to enlighten the shadow of that distant height.

352

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘There lies the fastness of Southern Mirkwood,’ said Haldir. ‘It is
clad in a forest of dark ﬁr, where the trees strive one against another
and their branches rot and wither. In the midst upon a stony height
stands Dol Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling.
We fear that now it is inhabited again, and with power sevenfold. A
black cloud lies often over it of late. In this high place you may see
the two powers that are opposed one to another; and ever they strive
now in thought, but whereas the light perceives the very heart of the
darkness, its own secret has not been discovered. Not yet.’ He turned
and climbed swiftly down, and they followed him.
At the hill’s foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still and silent as
a tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a
light was in his eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as
Frodo looked at him he knew that he beheld things as they once had
been in this same place. For the grim years were removed from the
face of Aragorn, and he seemed clothed in white, a young lord tall
and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue to one whom Frodo
could not see. Arwen vanimelda, namárië! he said, and then he drew
a breath, and returning out of his thought he looked at Frodo and
smiled.
‘Here is the heart of Elvendom on earth,’ he said, ‘and here my
heart dwells ever, unless there be a light beyond the dark roads that
we still must tread, you and I. Come with me!’ And taking Frodo’s
hand in his, he left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never
again as living man.

Chapter 7
THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL
The sun was sinking behind the mountains, and the shadows were
deepening in the woods, when they went on again. Their paths now
went into thickets where the dusk had already gathered. Night came
beneath the trees as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver
lamps.
Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves
under a pale evening sky pricked by a few early stars. There was a
wide treeless space before them, running in a great circle and bending
away on either hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow,
but the grass upon its brink was green, as if it glowed still in memory
of the sun that had gone. Upon the further side there rose to a great
height a green wall encircling a green hill thronged with mallorn-trees
taller than any they had yet seen in all the land. Their height could
not be guessed, but they stood up in the twilight like living towers.
In their many-tiered branches and amid their ever-moving leaves
countless lights were gleaming, green and gold and silver. Haldir
turned towards the Company.
‘Welcome to Caras Galadhon!’ he said. ‘Here is the city of the
Galadhrim where dwell the Lord Celeborn and Galadriel the Lady
of Lórien. But we cannot enter here, for the gates do not look northward. We must go round to the southern side, and the way is not
short, for the city is great.’
There was a road paved with white stone running on the outer
brink of the fosse. Along this they went westward, with the city ever
climbing up like a green cloud upon their left; and as the night
deepened more lights sprang forth, until all the hill seemed aﬁre with
stars. They came at last to a white bridge, and crossing found the
great gates of the city: they faced south-west, set between the ends
of the encircling wall that here overlapped, and they were tall and
strong, and hung with many lamps.
Haldir knocked and spoke, and the gates opened soundlessly; but
of guards Frodo could see no sign. The travellers passed within, and
the gates shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the
ends of the wall, and passing quickly through it they entered the City
of the Trees. No folk could they see, nor hear any feet upon the
paths; but there were many voices, about them, and in the air above.

354

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Far away up on the hill they could hear the sound of singing falling
from on high like soft rain upon leaves.
They went along many paths and climbed many stairs, until they
came to the high places and saw before them amid a wide lawn a
fountain shimmering. It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the
boughs of trees, and it fell into a basin of silver, from which a white
stream spilled. Upon the south side of the lawn there stood the
mightiest of all the trees; its great smooth bole gleamed like grey silk,
and up it towered, until its ﬁrst branches, far above, opened their
huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves. Beside it a broad white
ladder stood, and at its foot three Elves were seated. They sprang
up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they were tall
and clad in grey mail, and from their shoulders hung long white
cloaks.
‘Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,’ said Haldir. ‘It is their wish
that you should ascend and speak with them.’
One of the Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn,
and it was answered three times from far above. ‘I will go ﬁrst,’ said
Haldir. ‘Let Frodo come next and with him Legolas. The others may
follow as they wish. It is a long climb for those that are not accustomed
to such stairs, but you may rest upon the way.’
As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many ﬂets: some on one
side, some on another, and some set about the bole of the tree, so
that the ladder passed through them. At a great height above the
ground he came to a wide talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it
was built a house, so large that almost it would have served for a hall
of Men upon the earth. He entered behind Haldir, and found that
he was in a chamber of oval shape, in the midst of which grew the
trunk of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its crown, and yet
making still a pillar of wide girth.
The chamber was ﬁlled with a soft light; its walls were green and
silver and its roof of gold. Many Elves were seated there. On two
chairs beneath the bole of the tree and canopied by a living bough
there sat, side by side, Celeborn and Galadriel. They stood up to
greet their guests, after the manner of Elves, even those who were
accounted mighty kings. Very tall they were, and the Lady no less
tall than the Lord; and they were grave and beautiful. They were
clad wholly in white; and the hair of the Lady was of deep gold, and
the hair of the Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright; but no
sign of age was upon them, unless it were in the depths of their eyes;
for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet profound, the
wells of deep memory.
Haldir led Frodo before them, and the Lord welcomed him in his

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

355

own tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon
his face.
‘Sit now beside my chair, Frodo of the Shire!’ said Celeborn.
‘When all have come we will speak together.’
Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name as they
entered. ‘Welcome Aragorn son of Arathorn!’ he said. ‘It is eight and
thirty years of the world outside since you came to this land; and
those years lie heavy on you. But the end is near, for good or ill.
Here lay aside your burden for a while!’
‘Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey
hither from the North.’
‘Welcome Gimli son of Glóin! It is long indeed since we saw one
of Durin’s folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our
long law. May it be a sign that though the world is now dark better
days are at hand, and that friendship shall be renewed between our
peoples.’ Gimli bowed low.
When all the guests were seated before his chair the Lord looked
at them again. ‘Here there are eight,’ he said. ‘Nine were to set out:
so said the messages. But maybe there has been some change of
counsel that we have not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness
gathers between us, and all this year the shadows have grown longer.’
‘Nay, there was no change of counsel,’ said the Lady Galadriel,
speaking for the ﬁrst time. Her voice was clear and musical, but
deeper than woman’s wont. ‘Gandalf the Grey set out with the Company, but he did not pass the borders of this land. Now tell us where
he is; for I much desired to speak with him again. But I cannot see
him from afar, unless he comes within the fences of Lothlórien: a
grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and of his mind are
hidden from me.’
‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow. He
remained in Moria and did not escape.’
At these words all the Elves in the hall cried aloud in grief and
amazement. ‘These are evil tidings,’ said Celeborn, ‘the most evil
that have been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.’ He
turned to Haldir. ‘Why has nothing of this been told to me before?’
he asked in the elven-tongue.
‘We have not spoken to Haldir of our deeds or our purpose,’ said
Legolas. ‘At ﬁrst we were weary and danger was too close behind;
and afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time, as we walked
in gladness on the fair paths of Lórien.’
‘Yet our grief is great and our loss cannot be mended,’ said Frodo.
‘Gandalf was our guide, and he led us through Moria; and when our
escape seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.’

356

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Tell us now the full tale!’ said Celeborn.
Then Aragorn recounted all that had happened upon the pass of
Caradhras, and in the days that followed; and he spoke of Balin and
his book, and the ﬁght in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the ﬁre,
and the narrow bridge, and the coming of the Terror. ‘An evil of the
Ancient World it seemed, such as I have never seen before,’ said
Aragorn. ‘It was both a shadow and a ﬂame, strong and terrible.’
‘It was a Balrog of Morgoth,’ said Legolas; ‘of all elf-banes the
most deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.’
‘Indeed I saw upon the bridge that which haunts our darkest
dreams, I saw Durin’s Bane,’ said Gimli in a low voice, and dread
was in his eyes.
‘Alas!’ said Celeborn. ‘We long have feared that under Caradhras
a terror slept. But had I known that the Dwarves had stirred up this
evil in Moria again, I would have forbidden you to pass the northern
borders, you and all that went with you. And if it were possible, one
would say that at the last Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going
needlessly into the net of Moria.’
‘He would be rash indeed that said that thing,’ said Galadriel
gravely. ‘Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those
that followed him knew not his mind and cannot report his full
purpose. But however it may be with the guide, the followers are
blameless. Do not repent of your welcome to the Dwarf. If our folk
had been exiled long and far from Lothlórien, who of the Galadhrim,
even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not wish to look
upon their ancient home, though it had become an abode of dragons?
‘Dark is the water of Kheled-zâram, and cold are the springs of
Kibil-nâla, and fair were the many-pillared halls of Khazad-dûm in
Elder Days before the fall of mighty kings beneath the stone.’ She
looked upon Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And
the Dwarf, hearing the names given in his own ancient tongue, looked
up and met her eyes; and it seemed to him that he looked suddenly
into the heart of an enemy and saw there love and understanding.
Wonder came into his face, and then he smiled in answer.
He rose clumsily and bowed in dwarf-fashion, saying: ‘Yet more
fair is the living land of Lórien, and the Lady Galadriel is above all
the jewels that lie beneath the earth!’
There was a silence. At length Celeborn spoke again. ‘I did not
know that your plight was so evil,’ he said. ‘Let Gimli forget my
harsh words: I spoke in the trouble of my heart. I will do what I can
to aid you, each according to his wish and need, but especially that
one of the little folk who bears the burden.’
‘Your quest is known to us,’ said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. ‘But

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

357

we will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove,
maybe, that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself
plainly purposed. For the Lord of the Galadhrim is accounted the
wisest of the Elves of Middle-earth, and a giver of gifts beyond the
power of kings. He has dwelt in the West since the days of dawn,
and I have dwelt with him years uncounted; for ere the fall of
Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the mountains, and together
through ages of the world we have fought the long defeat.
‘I it was who ﬁrst summoned the White Council. And if my designs
had not gone amiss, it would have been governed by Gandalf the
Grey, and then mayhap things would have gone otherwise. But even
now there is hope left. I will not give you counsel, saying do this, or
do that. For not in doing or contriving, nor in choosing between this
course and another, can I avail; but only in knowing what was and is,
and in part also what shall be. But this I will say to you: your Quest
stands upon the edge of a knife. Stray but a little and it will fail, to the
ruin of all. Yet hope remains while all the Company is true.’
And with that word she held them with her eyes, and in silence
looked searchingly at each of them in turn. None save Legolas and
Aragorn could long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and
hung his head.
At length the Lady Galadriel released them from her eyes, and
she smiled. ‘Do not let your hearts be troubled,’ she said. ‘Tonight
you shall sleep in peace.’ Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary,
as those who have been questioned long and deeply, though no words
had been spoken openly.
‘Go now!’ said Celeborn. ‘You are worn with sorrow and much
toil. Even if your Quest did not concern us closely, you should have
refuge in this City, until you were healed and refreshed. Now you
shall rest, and we will not speak of your further road for a while.’
That night the Company slept upon the ground, much to the
satisfaction of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion
among the trees near the fountain, and in it they laid soft couches;
then speaking words of peace with fair Elvish voices they left them.
For a little while the travellers talked of their night before in the
tree-tops, and of their day’s journey, and of the Lord and Lady; for
they had not yet the heart to look further back.
‘What did you blush for, Sam?’ said Pippin. ‘You soon broke
down. Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I
hope it was nothing worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my
blankets.’
‘I never thought no such thing,’ answered Sam, in no mood for
jest. ‘If you want to know, I felt as if I hadn’t got nothing on, and I

358

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

didn’t like it. She seemed to be looking inside me and asking me
what I would do if she gave me the chance of ﬂying back home to
the Shire to a nice little hole with – with a bit of garden of my own.’
‘That’s funny,’ said Merry. ‘Almost exactly what I felt myself;
only, only well, I don’t think I’ll say any more,’ he ended lamely.
All of them, it seemed, had fared alike: each had felt that he was
offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and
something that he greatly desired: clear before his mind it lay, and
to get it he had only to turn aside from the road and leave the Quest
and the war against Sauron to others.
‘And it seemed to me, too,’ said Gimli, ‘that my choice would
remain secret and known only to myself.’
‘To me it seemed exceedingly strange,’ said Boromir. ‘Maybe it
was only a test, and she thought to read our thoughts for her own
good purpose; but almost I should have said that she was tempting
us, and offering what she pretended to have the power to give. It
need not be said that I refused to listen. The Men of Minas Tirith
are true to their word.’ But what he thought that the Lady had offered
him Boromir did not tell.
And as for Frodo, he would not speak, though Boromir pressed him
with questions. ‘She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,’ he said.
‘Yes,’ said Frodo; ‘but whatever came into my mind then I will
keep there.’
‘Well, have a care!’ said Boromir. ‘I do not feel too sure of this
Elvish Lady and her purposes.’
‘Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel!’ said Aragorn sternly. ‘You
know not what you say. There is in her and in this land no evil,
unless a man bring it hither himself. Then let him beware! But tonight
I shall sleep without fear for the ﬁrst time since I left Rivendell. And
may I sleep deep, and forget for a while my grief ! I am weary in body
and in heart.’ He cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once
into a long sleep.
The others soon did the same, and no sound or dream disturbed
their slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day was
broad upon the lawn before the pavilion, and the fountain rose and
fell glittering in the sun.
They remained some days in Lothlórien, so far as they could tell
or remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun shone clear,
save for a gentle rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all
things fresh and clean. The air was cool and soft, as if it were early
spring, yet they felt about them the deep and thoughtful quiet of
winter. It seemed to them that they did little but eat and drink and
rest, and walk among the trees; and it was enough.

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

359

They had not seen the Lord and Lady again, and they had little
speech with the Elven-folk; for few of these knew or would use the
Westron tongue. Haldir had bidden them farewell and gone back
again to the fences of the North, where great watch was now kept
since the tidings of Moria that the Company had brought. Legolas
was away much among the Galadhrim, and after the ﬁrst night he
did not sleep with the other companions, though he returned to eat
and talk with them. Often he took Gimli with him when he went
abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change.
Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of
Gandalf, and all that each had known and seen of him came clear
before their minds. As they were healed of hurt and weariness of
body the grief of their loss grew more keen. Often they heard nearby
Elvish voices singing, and knew that they were making songs of lamentation for his fall, for they caught his name among the sweet sad
words that they could not understand.
Mithrandir, Mithrandir sang the Elves, O Pilgrim Grey! For so they
loved to call him. But if Legolas was with the Company, he would not
interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that
for him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for
song.
It was Frodo who ﬁrst put something of his sorrow into halting
words. He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Rivendell he had listened and had not sung himself, though his memory
was stored with many things that others had made before him. But
now as he sat beside the fountain in Lórien and heard about him the
voices of the Elves, his thought took shape in a song that seemed fair
to him; yet when he tried to repeat it to Sam only snatches remained,
faded as a handful of withered leaves.
When evening in the Shire was grey
his footsteps on the Hill were heard;
before the dawn he went away
on journey long without a word.
From Wilderland to Western shore,
from northern waste to southern hill,
through dragon-lair and hidden door
and darkling woods he walked at will.
With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men,
with mortal and immortal folk,
with bird on bough and beast in den,
in their own secret tongues he spoke.

360

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

A deadly sword, a healing hand,
a back that bent beneath its load;
a trumpet-voice, a burning brand,
a weary pilgrim on the road.
A lord of wisdom throned he sat,
swift in anger, quick to laugh;
an old man in a battered hat
who leaned upon a thorny staff.
He stood upon the bridge alone
and Fire and Shadow both deﬁed;
his staff was broken on the stone,
in Khazad-dûm his wisdom died.
‘Why, you’ll be beating Mr. Bilbo next!’ said Sam.
‘No, I am afraid not,’ said Frodo. ‘But that is the best I can do
yet.’
‘Well, Mr. Frodo, if you do have another go, I hope you’ll say a
word about his ﬁreworks,’ said Sam. ‘Something like this:
The ﬁnest rockets ever seen:
they burst in stars of blue and green,
or after thunder golden showers
came falling like a rain of ﬂowers.
Though that doesn’t do them justice by a long road.’
‘No, I’ll leave that to you, Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But – well,
I can’t talk of it any more. I can’t bear to think of bringing the news
to him.’
One evening Frodo and Sam were walking together in the cool
twilight. Both of them felt restless again. On Frodo suddenly the
shadow of parting had fallen: he knew somehow that the time was
very near when he must leave Lothlórien.
‘What do you think of Elves now, Sam?’ he said. ‘I asked you the
same question once before – it seems a very long while ago; but you
have seen more of them since then.’
‘I have indeed!’ said Sam. ‘And I reckon there’s Elves and Elves.
They’re all Elvish enough, but they’re not all the same. Now these
folk aren’t wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes
of us: they seem to belong here, more even than Hobbits do in the
Shire. Whether they’ve made the land, or the land’s made them, it’s
hard to say, if you take my meaning. It’s wonderfully quiet here.

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

361

Nothing seems to be going on, and nobody seems to want it to. If
there’s any magic about, it’s right down deep, where I can’t lay my
hands on it, in a manner of speaking.’
‘You can see and feel it everywhere,’ said Frodo.
‘Well,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t see nobody working it. No ﬁreworks
like poor old Gandalf used to show. I wonder we don’t see nothing
of the Lord and Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could
do some wonderful things, if she had a mind. I’d dearly love to see
some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo!’
‘I wouldn’t,’ said Frodo. ‘I am content. And I don’t miss Gandalf ’s
ﬁreworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his
voice.’
‘You’re right,’ said Sam. ‘And don’t think I’m ﬁnding fault. I’ve
often wanted to see a bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales,
but I’ve never heard of a better land than this. It’s like being at home
and on a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don’t
want to leave. All the same, I’m beginning to feel that if we’ve got
to go on, then we’d best get it over.
‘It’s the job that’s never started as takes longest to ﬁnish, as my old
gaffer used to say. And I don’t reckon that these folk can do much
more to help us, magic or no. It’s when we leave this land that we
shall miss Gandalf worse, I’m thinking.’
‘I am afraid that’s only too true, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘Yet I hope
very much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves
again.’
Even as he spoke, they saw, as if she came in answer to their
words, the Lady Galadriel approaching. Tall and white and fair she
walked beneath the trees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them.
Turning aside, she led them towards the southern slopes of the
hill of Caras Galadhon, and passing through a high green hedge they
came into an enclosed garden. No trees grew there, and it lay open
to the sky. The evening star had risen and was shining with white
ﬁre above the western woods. Down a long ﬂight of steps the Lady
went into the deep green hollow, through which ran murmuring the
silver stream that issued from the fountain on the hill. At the bottom,
upon a low pedestal carved like a branching tree, stood a basin of
silver, wide and shallow, and beside it stood a silver ewer.
With water from the stream Galadriel ﬁlled the basin to the brim,
and breathed on it, and when the water was still again she spoke.
‘Here is the Mirror of Galadriel,’ she said. ‘I have brought you here
so that you may look in it, if you will.’
The air was very still, and the dell was dark, and the Elf-lady
beside him was tall and pale. ‘What shall we look for, and what shall
we see?’ asked Frodo, ﬁlled with awe.

362

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,’ she answered,
‘and to some I can show what they desire to see. But the Mirror will
also show things unbidden, and those are often stranger and more
proﬁtable than things which we wish to behold. What you will see,
if you leave the Mirror free to work, I cannot tell. For it shows things
that were, and things that are, and things that yet may be. But which
it is that he sees, even the wisest cannot always tell. Do you wish to
look?’
Frodo did not answer.
‘And you?’ she said, turning to Sam. ‘For this is what your folk
would call magic, I believe; though I do not understand clearly what
they mean; and they seem to use the same word of the deceits of the
Enemy. But this, if you will, is the magic of Galadriel. Did you not
say that you wished to see Elf-magic?’
‘I did,’ said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. ‘I’ll
have a peep, Lady, if you’re willing.
‘And I’d not mind a glimpse of what’s going on at home,’ he said
in an aside to Frodo. ‘It seems a terrible long time that I’ve been
away. But there, like as not I’ll only see the stars, or something that
I won’t understand.’
‘Like as not,’ said the Lady with a gentle laugh. ‘But come, you
shall look and see what you may. Do not touch the water!’
Sam climbed up on the foot of the pedestal and leaned over
the basin. The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reﬂected
in it.
‘There’s only stars, as I thought,’ he said. Then he gave a low
gasp, for the stars went out. As if a dark veil had been withdrawn,
the Mirror grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and
the branches of trees were waving and tossing in the wind. But before
Sam could make up his mind what it was that he saw, the light faded;
and now he thought he saw Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep
under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed to see himself going along
a dim passage, and climbing an endless winding stair. It came to him
suddenly that he was looking urgently for something, but what it was
he did not know. Like a dream the vision shifted and went back, and
he saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and he
could see what was going on: they were not waving in the wind, they
were falling, crashing to the ground.
‘Hi!’ cried Sam in an outraged voice. ‘There’s that Ted Sandyman
a-cutting down trees as he shouldn’t. They didn’t ought to be felled:
it’s that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater.
I wish I could get at Ted, and I’d fell him!’
But now Sam noticed that the Old Mill had vanished, and a large
red-brick building was being put up where it had stood. Lots of folk

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

363

were busily at work. There was a tall red chimney nearby. Black
smoke seemed to cloud the surface of the Mirror.
‘There’s some devilry at work in the Shire,’ he said. ‘Elrond knew
what he was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.’ Then
suddenly Sam gave a cry and sprang away. ‘I can’t stay here,’ he said
wildly. ‘I must go home. They’ve dug up Bagshot Row, and there’s
the poor old Gaffer going down the Hill with his bits of things on a
barrow. I must go home!’
‘You cannot go home alone,’ said the Lady. ‘You did not wish to
go home without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and
yet you knew that evil things might well be happening in the Shire.
Remember that the Mirror shows many things, and not all have yet
come to pass. Some never come to be, unless those that behold the
visions turn aside from their path to prevent them. The Mirror is
dangerous as a guide of deeds.’
Sam sat on the ground and put his head in his hands. ‘I wish I
had never come here, and I don’t want to see no more magic,’
he said and fell silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly,
as if struggling with tears. ‘No, I’ll go home by the long road with
Mr. Frodo, or not at all,’ he said. ‘But I hope I do get back some
day. If what I’ve seen turns out true, somebody’s going to catch it
hot!’
‘Do you now wish to look, Frodo?’ said the Lady Galadriel. ‘You
did not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.’
‘Do you advise me to look?’ asked Frodo.
‘No,’ she said. ‘I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am
not a counsellor. You may learn something, and whether what you
see be fair or evil, that may be proﬁtable, and yet it may not. Seeing
is both good and perilous. Yet I think, Frodo, that you have courage
and wisdom enough for the venture, or I would not have brought
you here. Do as you will!’
‘I will look,’ said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent
over the dark water. At once the Mirror cleared and he saw a twilit
land. Mountains loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A
long grey road wound back out of sight. Far away a ﬁgure came
slowly down the road, faint and small at ﬁrst, but growing larger and
clearer as it approached. Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded
him of Gandalf. He almost called aloud the wizard’s name, and then
he saw that the ﬁgure was clothed not in grey but in white, in a white
that shone faintly in the dusk; and in its hand there was a white staff.
The head was so bowed that he could see no face, and presently the
ﬁgure turned aside round a bend in the road and went out of the
Mirror’s view. Doubt came into Frodo’s mind: was this a vision of

364

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gandalf on one of his many lonely journeys long ago, or was it
Saruman?
The vision now changed. Brief and small but very vivid he caught
a glimpse of Bilbo walking restlessly about his room. The table was
littered with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows.
Then there was a pause, and after it many swift scenes followed
that Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which
he had become involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which
he had never seen before but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell.
The sea rose and raged in a great storm. Then he saw against the
Sun, sinking blood-red into a wrack of clouds, the black outline of
a tall ship with torn sails riding up out of the West. Then a wide
river ﬂowing through a populous city. Then a white fortress with
seven towers. And then again a ship with black sails, but now it was
morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing
the emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke as of ﬁre and
battle arose, and again the sun went down in a burning red that faded
into a grey mist; and into the mist a small ship passed away, twinkling
with lights. It vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away.
But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as if a hole
had opened in the world of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness.
In the black abyss there appeared a single Eye that slowly grew, until
it ﬁlled nearly all the Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood
rooted, unable to cry out or to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was
rimmed with ﬁre, but was itself glazed, yellow as a cat’s, watchful
and intent, and the black slit of its pupil opened on a pit, a window
into nothing.
Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and
Frodo knew with certainty and horror that among the many things
that it sought he himself was one. But he also knew that it could not
see him – not yet, not unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon
its chain about his neck grew heavy, heavier than a great stone, and
his head was dragged downwards. The Mirror seemed to be growing
hot and curls of steam were rising from the water. He was slipping
forward.
‘Do not touch the water!’ said the Lady Galadriel softly. The vision
faded, and Frodo found that he was looking at the cool stars twinkling
in the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at
the Lady.
‘I know what it was that you last saw,’ she said; ‘for that is also
in my mind. Do not be afraid! But do not think that only by singing
amid the trees, nor even by the slender arrows of elven-bows, is this
land of Lothlórien maintained and defended against its Enemy. I say
to you, Frodo, that even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord

THE MIRROR OF GALADRIEL

365

and know his mind, or all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And
he gropes ever to see me and my thought. But still the door is closed!’
She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards
the East in a gesture of rejection and denial. Eärendil, the Evening
Star, most beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it
that the ﬁgure of the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground.
Its rays glanced upon a ring about her ﬁnger; it glittered like polished
gold overlaid with silver light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if
the Even-star had come down to rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at
the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed to him that he understood.
‘Yes,’ she said, divining his thought, ‘it is not permitted to speak
of it, and Elrond could not do so. But it cannot be hidden from the
Ring-bearer, and one who has seen the Eye. Verily it is in the land
of Lórien upon the ﬁnger of Galadriel that one of the Three remains.
This is Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeper.
‘He suspects, but he does not know – not yet. Do you not see
now wherefore your coming is to us as the footstep of Doom? For if
you fail, then we are laid bare to the Enemy. Yet if you succeed, then
our power is diminished, and Lothlórien will fade, and the tides of
Time will sweep it away. We must depart into the West, or dwindle
to a rustic folk of dell and cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.’
Frodo bent his head. ‘And what do you wish?’ he said at last.
‘That what should be shall be,’ she answered. ‘The love of the
Elves for their land and their works is deeper than the deeps of the
Sea, and their regret is undying and cannot ever wholly be assuaged.
Yet they will cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they
know him now. For the fate of Lothlórien you are not answerable,
but only for the doing of your own task. Yet I could wish, were it of
any avail, that the One Ring had never been wrought, or had remained
for ever lost.’
‘You are wise and fearless and fair, Lady Galadriel,’ said Frodo.
‘I will give you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter
for me.’
Galadriel laughed with a sudden clear laugh. ‘Wise the Lady
Galadriel may be,’ she said, ‘yet here she has met her match in courtesy.
Gently are you revenged for my testing of your heart at our ﬁrst
meeting. You begin to see with a keen eye. I do not deny that my
heart has greatly desired to ask what you offer. For many long years
I had pondered what I might do, should the Great Ring come into
my hands, and behold! it was brought within my grasp. The evil that
was devised long ago works on in many ways, whether Sauron himself
stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set to the
credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?
‘And now at last it comes. You will give me the Ring freely! In

366

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

place of the Dark Lord you will set up a Queen. And I shall not be
dark, but beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair
as the Sea and the Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Dreadful
as the Storm and the Lightning! Stronger than the foundations of
the earth. All shall love me and despair!’
She lifted up her hand and from the ring that she wore there issued
a great light that illumined her alone and left all else dark. She stood
before Frodo seeming now tall beyond measurement, and beautiful
beyond enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall,
and the light faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and lo! she was
shrunken: a slender elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle
voice was soft and sad.
‘I pass the test,’ she said. ‘I will diminish, and go into the West,
and remain Galadriel.’
They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke
again. ‘Let us return!’ she said. ‘In the morning you must depart, for
now we have chosen, and the tides of fate are ﬂowing.’
‘I would ask one thing before we go,’ said Frodo, ‘a thing which
I often meant to ask Gandalf in Rivendell. I am permitted to wear
the One Ring: why cannot I see all the others and know the thoughts
of those that wear them?’
‘You have not tried,’ she said. ‘Only thrice have you set the Ring
upon your ﬁnger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try! It
would destroy you. Did not Gandalf tell you that the rings give power
according to the measure of each possessor? Before you could use
that power you would need to become far stronger, and to train your
will to the domination of others. Yet even so, as Ring-bearer and as
one that has borne it on ﬁnger and seen that which is hidden, your
sight is grown keener. You have perceived my thought more clearly
than many that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that
holds the Seven and the Nine. And did you not see and recognize
the ring upon my ﬁnger? Did you see my ring?’ she asked turning
again to Sam.
‘No, Lady,’ he answered. ‘To tell you the truth, I wondered what
you were talking about. I saw a star through your ﬁngers. But if you’ll
pardon my speaking out, I think my master was right. I wish you’d
take his Ring. You’d put things to rights. You’d stop them digging
up the Gaffer and turning him adrift. You’d make some folk pay for
their dirty work.’
‘I would,’ she said. ‘That is how it would begin. But it would not
stop with that, alas! We will not speak more of it. Let us go!’

Chapter 8
´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO
That night the Company was again summoned to the chamber of
Celeborn, and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words.
At length Celeborn spoke of their departure.
‘Now is the time,’ he said, ‘when those who wish to continue the
Quest must harden their hearts to leave this land. Those who no
longer wish to go forward may remain here, for a while. But whether
they stay or go, none can be sure of peace. For we are come now
to the edge of doom. Here those who wish may await the oncoming
of the hour till either the ways of the world lie open again, or we
summon them to the last need of Lórien. Then they may return to
their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in
battle.’
There was a silence. ‘They all resolved to go forward,’ said Galadriel
looking in their eyes.
‘As for me,’ said Boromir, ‘my way home lies onward and not
back.’
‘That is true,’ said Celeborn, ‘but is all this Company going with
you to Minas Tirith?’
‘We have not decided our course,’ said Aragorn. ‘Beyond Lothlórien I do not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not
think that even he had any clear purpose.’
‘Maybe not,’ said Celeborn, ‘yet when you leave this land, you
can no longer forget the Great River. As some of you know well, it
cannot be crossed by travellers with baggage between Lórien and
Gondor, save by boat. And are not the bridges of Osgiliath broken
down and all the landings held now by the Enemy?
‘On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon
this side, upon the west; but the straight road of the Quest lies east of
the River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take?’
‘If my advice is heeded, it will be the western shore, and the way
to Minas Tirith,’ answered Boromir. ‘But I am not the leader of the
Company.’ The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful
and troubled.
‘I see that you do not yet know what to do,’ said Celeborn. ‘It is
not my part to choose for you; but I will help you as I may. There
are some among you who can handle boats: Legolas, whose folk know
the swift Forest River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the
traveller.’

368

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘And one Hobbit!’ cried Merry. ‘Not all of us look on boats as
wild horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.’
‘That is well,’ said Celeborn. ‘Then I will furnish your Company
with boats. They must be small and light, for if you go far by water,
there are places where you will be forced to carry them. You will
come to the rapids of Sarn Gebir, and maybe at last to the great falls
of Rauros where the River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and
there are other perils. Boats may make your journey less toilsome for
a while. Yet they will not give you counsel: in the end you must leave
them and the River, and turn west – or east.’
Aragorn thanked Celeborn many times. The gift of boats comforted him much, not least because there would now be no need to
decide his course for some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils lay ahead, it seemed better to ﬂoat down the
broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to plod forward with bent
backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still thought boats as
bad as wild horses, or worse, and not all the dangers that he had
survived made him think better of them.
‘All shall be prepared for you and await you at the haven before
noon tomorrow,’ said Celeborn. ‘I will send my people to you in the
morning to help you make ready for the journey. Now we will wish
you all a fair night and untroubled sleep.’
‘Good night, my friends!’ said Galadriel. ‘Sleep in peace! Do not
trouble your hearts overmuch with thought of the road tonight.
Maybe the paths that you each shall tread are already laid before
your feet, though you do not see them. Good night!’
The Company now took their leave and returned to their pavilion.
Legolas went with them, for this was to be their last night in Lothlórien, and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take
counsel together.
For a long time they debated what they should do, and how it
would be best to attempt the fulﬁlling of their purpose with the Ring;
but they came to no decision. It was plain that most of them desired
to go ﬁrst to Minas Tirith, and to escape at least for a while from
the terror of the Enemy. They would have been willing to follow a
leader over the River and into the shadow of Mordor; but Frodo
spoke no word, and Aragorn was still divided in his mind.
His own plan, while Gandalf remained with them, had been to go
with Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he
believed that the message of the dreams was a summons, and that
the hour had come at last when the heir of Elendil should come forth
and strive with Sauron for the mastery. But in Moria the burden of
Gandalf had been laid on him; and he knew that he could not now

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

369

forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in the end to go with Boromir.
And yet what help could he or any of the Company give to Frodo,
save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?
‘I shall go to Minas Tirith, alone if need be, for it is my duty,’
said Boromir; and after that he was silent for a while, sitting with his
eyes ﬁxed on Frodo, as if he was trying to read the Halﬂing’s thoughts.
At length he spoke again, softly, as if he was debating with himself.
‘If you wish only to destroy the Ring,’ he said, ‘then there is little
use in war and weapons; and the Men of Minas Tirith cannot help.
But if you wish to destroy the armed might of the Dark Lord, then
it is folly to go without force into his domain; and folly to throw
away.’ He paused suddenly, as if he had become aware that he was
speaking his thoughts aloud. ‘It would be folly to throw lives away,
I mean,’ he ended. ‘It is a choice between defending a strong place
and walking openly into the arms of death. At least, that is how I
see it.’
Frodo caught something new and strange in Boromir’s glance,
and he looked hard at him. Plainly Boromir’s thought was different
from his ﬁnal words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The
Ring of Power? He had said something like this at the Council, but
then he had accepted the correction of Elrond. Frodo looked at
Aragorn, but he seemed deep in his own thought and made no sign
that he had heeded Boromir’s words. And so their debate ended.
Merry and Pippin were already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The
night was growing old.
In the morning, as they were beginning to pack their slender goods,
Elves that could speak their tongue came to them and brought them
many gifts of food and clothing for the journey. The food was mostly
in the form of very thin cakes, made of a meal that was baked a light
brown on the outside, and inside was the colour of cream. Gimli
took up one of the cakes and looked at it with a doubtful eye.
‘Cram,’ he said under his breath, as he broke off a crisp corner
and nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and he ate all the
rest of the cake with relish.
‘No more, no more!’ cried the Elves laughing. ‘You have eaten
enough already for a long day’s march.’
‘I thought it was only a kind of cram, such as the Dale-men make
for journeys in the wild,’ said the Dwarf.
‘So it is,’ they answered. ‘But we call it lembas or waybread, and
it is more strengthening than any food made by Men, and it is more
pleasant than cram, by all accounts.’
‘Indeed it is,’ said Gimli. ‘Why, it is better than the honey-cakes
of the Beornings, and that is great praise, for the Beornings are the

370

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

best bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out
their cakes to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts!’
‘All the same, we bid you spare the food,’ they said. ‘Eat little at
a time, and only at need. For these things are given to serve you
when all else fails. The cakes will keep sweet for many many days,
if they are unbroken and left in their leaf-wrappings, as we have
brought them. One will keep a traveller on his feet for a day of long
labour, even if he be one of the tall Men of Minas Tirith.’
The Elves next unwrapped and gave to each of the Company the
clothes they had brought. For each they had provided a hood and
cloak, made according to his size, of the light but warm silken stuff
that the Galadhrim wove. It was hard to say of what colour they
were: grey with the hue of twilight under the trees they seemed to
be; and yet if they were moved, or set in another light, they were green
as shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow ﬁelds by night, dusk-silver as
water under the stars. Each cloak was fastened about the neck with
a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver.
‘Are these magic cloaks?’ asked Pippin, looking at them with
wonder.
‘I do not know what you mean by that,’ answered the leader of
the Elves. ‘They are fair garments, and the web is good, for it was
made in this land. They are Elvish robes certainly, if that is what you
mean. Leaf and branch, water and stone: they have the hue and
beauty of all these things under the twilight of Lórien that we love;
for we put the thought of all that we love into all that we make. Yet
they are garments, not armour, and they will not turn shaft or blade.
But they should serve you well: they are light to wear, and warm
enough or cool enough at need. And you will ﬁnd them a great aid
in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you walk
among the stones or the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of
the Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never
before have we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.’
After their morning meal the Company said farewell to the lawn
by the fountain. Their hearts were heavy; for it was a fair place, and
it had become like home to them, though they could not count the
days and nights that they had passed there. As they stood for a
moment looking at the white water in the sunlight, Haldir came
walking towards them over the green grass of the glade. Frodo greeted
him with delight.
‘I have returned from the Northern Fences,’ said the Elf, ‘and I
am sent now to be your guide again. The Dimrill Dale is full of
vapour and clouds of smoke, and the mountains are troubled. There
are noises in the deeps of the earth. If any of you had thought of

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

371

returning northwards to your homes, you would not have been able
to pass that way. But come! Your path now goes south.’
As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were
empty; but in the trees above them many voices were murmuring
and singing. They themselves went silently. At last Haldir led them
down the southward slopes of the hill, and they came again to the
great gate hung with lamps, and to the white bridge; and so they
passed out and left the city of the Elves. Then they turned away from
the paved road and took a path that went off into a deep thicket of
mallorn-trees, and passed on, winding through rolling woodlands of
silver shadow, leading them ever down, southwards and eastwards,
towards the shores of the River.
They had gone some ten miles and noon was at hand when they
came on a high green wall. Passing through an opening they came
suddenly out of the trees. Before them lay a long lawn of shining
grass, studded with golden elanor that glinted in the sun. The lawn
ran out into a narrow tongue between bright margins: on the right
and west the Silverlode ﬂowed glittering; on the left and east the
Great River rolled its broad waters, deep and dark. On the further
shores the woodlands still marched on southwards as far as eye could
see, but all the banks were bleak and bare. No mallorn lifted its
gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lórien.
On the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meeting of the streams, there was a hythe of white stones and white
wood. By it were moored many boats and barges. Some were brightly
painted, and shone with silver and gold and green, but most were
either white or grey. Three small grey boats had been made ready
for the travellers, and in these the Elves stowed their goods. And
they added also coils of rope, three to each boat. Slender they looked,
but strong, silken to the touch, grey of hue like the elven-cloaks.
‘What are these?’ asked Sam, handling one that lay upon the
greensward.
‘Ropes indeed!’ answered an Elf from the boats. ‘Never travel far
without a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such are
these. They may be a help in many needs.’
‘You don’t need to tell me that!’ said Sam. ‘I came without any,
and I’ve been worried ever since. But I was wondering what these
were made of, knowing a bit about rope-making: it’s in the family as
you might say.’
‘They are made of hithlain,’ said the Elf, ‘but there is no time now
to instruct you in the art of their making. Had we known that this
craft delighted you, we could have taught you much. But now alas!
unless you should at some time return hither, you must be content
with our gift. May it serve you well!’

372

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Come!’ said Haldir. ‘All is now ready for you. Enter the boats!
But take care at ﬁrst!’
‘Heed the words!’ said the other Elves. ‘These boats are light-built,
and they are crafty and unlike the boats of other folk. They will not
sink, lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It
would be wise if you accustomed yourselves to stepping in and out,
here where there is a landing-place, before you set off downstream.’
The Company was arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam
were in one boat; Boromir, Merry, and Pippin in another; and in the
third were Legolas and Gimli, who had now become fast friends. In
this last boat most of the goods and packs were stowed. The boats
were moved and steered with short-handled paddles that had broad
leaf-shaped blades. When all was ready Aragorn led them on a trial
up the Silverlode. The current was swift and they went forward
slowly. Sam sat in the bows, clutching the sides, and looking back
wistfully to the shore. The sunlight glittering on the water dazzled
his eyes. As they passed beyond the green ﬁeld of the Tongue, the
trees drew down to the river’s brink. Here and there golden leaves
tossed and ﬂoated on the rippling stream. The air was very bright
and still, and there was a silence, except for the high distant song of
larks.
They turned a sharp bend in the river, and there, sailing proudly
down the stream towards them, they saw a swan of great size. The
water rippled on either side of the white breast beneath its curving
neck. Its beak shone like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet
set in yellow stones; its huge white wings were half lifted. A music
came down the river as it drew nearer; and suddenly they perceived
that it was a ship, wrought and carved with elven-skill in the likeness
of a bird. Two elves clad in white steered it with black paddles. In
the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind him stood Galadriel,
tall and white; a circlet of golden ﬂowers was in her hair, and in her
hand she held a harp, and she sang. Sad and sweet was the sound
of her voice in the cool clear air:
I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew:
Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.
Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,
And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.
Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone,
In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion.
There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching
years,
While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears.

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

373

O Lórien! The Winter comes, the bare and leaﬂess Day;
The leaves are falling in the stream, the River ﬂows away.
O Lórien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore
And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor.
But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me,
What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea?
Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The
Lady ended her song and greeted them. ‘We have come to bid our
last farewell,’ she said, ‘and to speed you with blessings from our
land.’
‘Though you have been our guests,’ said Celeborn, ‘you have not
yet eaten with us, and we bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here
between the ﬂowing waters that will bear you far from Lórien.’
The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their
boats and followed it. There in the last end of Egladil upon the
green grass the parting feast was held; but Frodo ate and drank little,
heeding only the beauty of the Lady and her voice. She seemed no
longer perilous or terrible, nor ﬁlled with hidden power. Already she
seemed to him, as by men of later days Elves still at times are seen:
present and yet remote, a living vision of that which has already been
left far behind by the ﬂowing streams of Time.
After they had eaten and drunk, sitting upon the grass, Celeborn
spoke to them again of their journey, and lifting his hand he pointed
south to the woods beyond the Tongue.
‘As you go down the water,’ he said, ‘you will ﬁnd that the trees
will fail, and you will come to a barren country. There the River
ﬂows in stony vales amid high moors, until at last after many leagues
it comes to the tall island of the Tindrock, that we call Tol Brandir.
There it casts its arms about the steep shores of the isle, and falls
then with a great noise and smoke over the cataracts of Rauros down
into the Nindalf, the Wetwang as it is called in your tongue. That is
a wide region of sluggish fen where the stream becomes tortuous and
much divided. There the Entwash ﬂows in by many mouths from
the Forest of Fangorn in the west. About that stream, on this side
of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the further side are the bleak hills
of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the East there, for they
look out over the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith
Gorgor and the black gates of Mordor.
‘Boromir, and any that go with him seeking Minas Tirith, will do
well to leave the Great River above Rauros and cross the Entwash
before it ﬁnds the marshes. Yet they should not go too far up that
stream, nor risk becoming entangled in the Forest of Fangorn. That

374

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

is a strange land, and is now little known. But Boromir and Aragorn
doubtless do not need this warning.’
‘Indeed we have heard of Fangorn in Minas Tirith,’ said Boromir.
‘But what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives’
tales, such as we tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is
now to us so far away that fancy can wander freely there. Of old
Fangorn lay upon the borders of our realm; but it is now many lives
of men since any of us visited it, to prove or disprove the legends
that have come down from distant years.
‘I have myself been at whiles in Rohan, but I have never crossed
it northwards. When I was sent out as a messenger, I passed through
the Gap by the skirts of the White Mountains, and crossed the Isen
and the Greyﬂood into Northerland. A long and wearisome journey.
Four hundred leagues I reckoned it, and it took me many months;
for I lost my horse at Tharbad, at the fording of the Greyﬂood. After
that journey, and the road I have trodden with this Company, I do
not much doubt that I shall ﬁnd a way through Rohan, and Fangorn
too, if need be.’
‘Then I need say no more,’ said Celeborn. ‘But do not despise
the lore that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance
that old wives keep in memory word of things that once were needful
for the wise to know.’
Now Galadriel rose from the grass, and taking a cup from one of
her maidens she ﬁlled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn.
‘Now it is time to drink the cup of farewell,’ she said. ‘Drink, Lord
of the Galadhrim! And let not your heart be sad, though night must
follow noon, and already our evening draweth nigh.’
Then she brought the cup to each of the Company, and bade
them drink and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded
them to sit again on the grass, and chairs were set for her and for
Celeborn. Her maidens stood silent about her, and a while she looked
upon her guests. At last she spoke again.
‘We have drunk the cup of parting,’ she said, ‘and the shadows
fall between us. But before you go, I have brought in my ship gifts
which the Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer you in memory
of Lothlórien.’ Then she called to each in turn.
‘Here is the gift of Celeborn and Galadriel to the leader of your
Company,’ she said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had
been made to ﬁt his sword. It was overlaid with a tracery of ﬂowers
and leaves wrought of silver and gold, and on it were set in elven-runes
formed of many gems the name Andúril and the lineage of the sword.
‘The blade that is drawn from this sheath shall not be stained or
broken even in defeat,’ she said. ‘But is there aught else that you

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

375

desire of me at our parting? For darkness will ﬂow between us, and
it may be that we shall not meet again, unless it be far hence upon
a road that has no returning.’
And Aragorn answered: ‘Lady, you know all my desire, and long
held in keeping the only treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to
give me, even if you would; and only through darkness shall I come
to it.’
‘Yet maybe this will lighten your heart,’ said Galadriel; ‘for it was
left in my care to be given to you, should you pass through this land.’
Then she lifted from her lap a great stone of a clear green, set in a
silver brooch that was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with outspread wings; and as she held it up the gem ﬂashed like the sun
shining through the leaves of spring. ‘This stone I gave to Celebrı́an
my daughter, and she to hers; and now it comes to you as a token
of hope. In this hour take the name that was foretold for you, Elessar,
the Elfstone of the House of Elendil!’
Then Aragorn took the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast,
and those who saw him wondered; for they had not marked before how
tall and kingly he stood, and it seemed to them that many years of toil
had fallen from his shoulders. ‘For the gifts that you have given me I
thank you,’ he said, ‘O Lady of Lórien of whom were sprung Celebrı́an
and Arwen Evenstar. What praise could I say more?’
The Lady bowed her head, and she turned then to Boromir, and
to him she gave a belt of gold; and to Merry and Pippin she gave
small silver belts, each with a clasp wrought like a golden ﬂower. To
Legolas she gave a bow such as the Galadhrim used, longer and
stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, and strung with a string of
elf-hair. With it went a quiver of arrows.
‘For you little gardener and lover of trees,’ she said to Sam, ‘I
have only a small gift.’ She put into his hand a little box of plain grey
wood, unadorned save for a single silver rune upon the lid. ‘Here is
set G for Galadriel,’ she said; ‘but also it may stand for garden in
your tongue. In this box there is earth from my orchard, and such
blessing as Galadriel has still to bestow is upon it. It will not keep
you on your road, nor defend you against any peril; but if you keep
it and see your home again at last, then perhaps it may reward you.
Though you should ﬁnd all barren and laid waste, there will be few
gardens in Middle-earth that will bloom like your garden, if you
sprinkle this earth there. Then you may remember Galadriel, and
catch a glimpse far off of Lórien, that you have seen only in our
winter. For our Spring and our Summer are gone by, and they will
never be seen on earth again save in memory.’
Sam went red to the ears and muttered something inaudible, as
he clutched the box and bowed as well as he could.

376

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves?’ said Galadriel,
turning to Gimli.
‘None, Lady,’ answered Gimli. ‘It is enough for me to have seen
the Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.’
‘Hear all ye Elves!’ she cried to those about her. ‘Let none say
again that Dwarves are grasping and ungracious! Yet surely, Gimli
son of Glóin, you desire something that I could give? Name it, I bid
you! You shall not be the only guest without a gift.’
‘There is nothing, Lady Galadriel,’ said Gimli, bowing low and
stammering. ‘Nothing, unless it might be – unless it is permitted to
ask, nay, to name a single strand of your hair, which surpasses the
gold of the earth as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not
ask for such a gift. But you commanded me to name my desire.’
The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and Celeborn
gazed at the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. ‘It is said that
the skill of the Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues,’
she said; ‘yet that is not true of Gimli. For none have ever made to
me a request so bold and yet so courteous. And how shall I refuse,
since I commanded him to speak? But tell me, what would you do
with such a gift?’
‘Treasure it, Lady,’ he answered, ‘in memory of your words to me
at our ﬁrst meeting. And if ever I return to the smithies of my home,
it shall be set in imperishable crystal to be an heirloom of my house,
and a pledge of good will between the Mountain and the Wood until
the end of days.’
Then the Lady unbraided one of her long tresses, and cut off three
golden hairs, and laid them in Gimli’s hand. ‘These words shall go
with the gift,’ she said. ‘I do not foretell, for all foretelling is now
vain: on the one hand lies darkness, and on the other only hope. But
if hope should not fail, then I say to you, Gimli son of Glóin, that
your hands shall ﬂow with gold, and yet over you gold shall have no
dominion.
‘And you, Ring-bearer,’ she said, turning to Frodo. ‘I come to you
last who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared this.’
She held up a small crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and
rays of white light sprang from her hand. ‘In this phial,’ she said, ‘is
caught the light of Eärendil’s star, set amid the waters of my fountain.
It will shine still brighter when night is about you. May it be a light
to you in dark places, when all other lights go out. Remember
Galadriel and her Mirror!’
Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between them,
he saw her again standing like a queen, great and beautiful, but no
longer terrible. He bowed, but found no words to say.
*
*
*

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

377

Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to the hythe.
A yellow noon lay on the green land of the Tongue, and the water
glittered with silver. All at last was made ready. The Company took
their places in the boats as before. Crying farewell, the Elves of Lórien
with long grey poles thrust them out into the ﬂowing stream, and
the rippling waters bore them slowly away. The travellers sat still
without moving or speaking. On the green bank near to the very
point of the Tongue the Lady Galadriel stood alone and silent. As
they passed her they turned and their eyes watched her slowly ﬂoating
away from them. For so it seemed to them: Lórien was slipping
backward, like a bright ship masted with enchanted trees, sailing on
to forgotten shores, while they sat helpless upon the margin of the
grey and leaﬂess world.
Even as they gazed, the Silverlode passed out into the currents of
the Great River, and their boats turned and began to speed southward. Soon the white form of the Lady was small and distant. She
shone like a window of glass upon a far hill in the westering sun, or
as a remote lake seen from a mountain: a crystal fallen in the lap of
the land. Then it seemed to Frodo that she lifted her arms in a ﬁnal
farewell, and far but piercing-clear on the following wind came the
sound of her voice singing. But now she sang in the ancient tongue
of the Elves beyond the Sea, and he did not understand the words:
fair was the music, but it did not comfort him.
Yet as is the way of Elvish words, they remained graven in his
memory, and long afterwards he interpreted them, as well as he could:
the language was that of Elven-song and spoke of things little known
on Middle-earth.
Ai! laurië lantar lassi súrinen,
yéni únótimë ve rámar aldaron!
Yéni ve lintë yuldar avánier
mi oromardi lisse-miruvóreva
Andúnë pella, Vardo tellumar
nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni
ómaryo airetári-lı́rinen.
Sı́ man i yulma nin enquantuva?
An sı́ Tintallë Varda Oiolossëo
ve fanyar máryat Elentári ortanë,
ar ilyë tier undulávë lumbulë;
ar sindanóriello caita mornië
i falmalinnar imbë met, ar hı́sië
untúpa Calaciryo mı́ri oialë.
Sı́ vanwa ná, Rómello vanwa, Valimar!

378

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Namárië! Nai hiruvalyë Valimar.
Nai elyë hiruva. Namárië!
‘Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind, long years numberless as
the wings of trees! The years have passed like swift draughts of the
sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults
of Varda wherein the stars tremble in the song of her voice, holy and
queenly. Who now shall reﬁll the cup for me? For now the Kindler,
Varda, the Queen of the Stars, from Mount Everwhite has uplifted
her hands like clouds, and all paths are drowned deep in shadow;
and out of a grey country darkness lies on the foaming waves between
us, and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever. Now lost, lost
to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou shalt ﬁnd
Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt ﬁnd it. Farewell!’ Varda is the name
of that Lady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth.
Suddenly the River swept round a bend, and the banks rose upon
either side, and the light of Lórien was hidden. To that fair land
Frodo never came again.
The travellers now turned their faces to the journey; the sun was
before them, and their eyes were dazzled, for all were ﬁlled with tears.
Gimli wept openly.
‘I have looked the last upon that which was fairest,’ he said to
Legolas his companion. ‘Henceforward I will call nothing fair, unless
it be her gift.’ He put his hand to his breast.
‘Tell me, Legolas, why did I come on this Quest? Little did I know
where the chief peril lay! Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we could
not foresee what we might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark
was the danger that I feared, and it did not hold me back. But I
would not have come, had I known the danger of light and joy. Now
I have taken my worst wound in this parting, even if I were to go
this night straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for Gimli son of Glóin!’
‘Nay!’ said Legolas. ‘Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world
in these after-days. For such is the way of it: to ﬁnd and lose, as it
seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you
blessed, Gimli son of Glóin: for your loss you suffer of your own free
will, and you might have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken
your companions, and the least reward that you shall have is that the
memory of Lothlórien shall remain ever clear and unstained in your
heart, and shall neither fade nor grow stale.’
‘Maybe,’ said Gimli; ‘and I thank you for your words. True words
doubtless; yet all such comfort is cold. Memory is not what the heart
desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zâram. Or so says
the heart of Gimli the Dwarf. Elves may see things otherwise. Indeed

´ RIEN
FAREWELL TO LO

379

I have heard that for them memory is more like to the waking world
than to a dream. Not so for Dwarves.
‘But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in
the water with all this baggage, and the Great River is swift. I do not
wish to drown my grief in cold water.’ He took up a paddle, and
steered towards the western bank, following Aragorn’s boat ahead,
which had already moved out of the middle stream.
So the Company went on their long way, down the wide hurrying
waters, borne ever southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank,
and they could not see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze
died away and the River ﬂowed without a sound. No voice of bird
broke the silence. The sun grew misty as the day grew old, until it
gleamed in a pale sky like a high white pearl. Then it faded into the
West, and dusk came early, followed by a grey and starless night.
Far into the dark quiet hours they ﬂoated on, guiding their boats
under the overhanging shadows of the western woods. Great trees
passed by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty roots through
the mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and
listened to the faint lap and gurgle of the River fretting among the
tree-roots and driftwood near the shore, until his head nodded and
he fell into an uneasy sleep.

Chapter 9
THE GREAT RIVER
Frodo was roused by Sam. He found that he was lying, well wrapped,
under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on
the west bank of the Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night
away, and the grey of morning was dim among the bare branches.
Gimli was busy with a small ﬁre near at hand.
They started again before the day was broad. Not that most of
the Company were eager to hurry southwards: they were content that
the decision, which they must make at latest when they came to
Rauros and the Tindrock Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let
the River bear them on at its own pace, having no desire to hasten
towards the perils that lay beyond, whichever course they took in the
end. Aragorn let them drift with the stream as they wished, husbanding their strength against weariness to come. But he insisted
that at least they should start early each day and journey on far into
the evening; for he felt in his heart that time was pressing, and he
feared that the Dark Lord had not been idle while they lingered in
Lórien.
Nonetheless they saw no sign of any enemy that day, nor the next.
The dull grey hours passed without event. As the third day of their
voyage wore on the lands changed slowly: the trees thinned and then
failed altogether. On the eastern bank to their left they saw long
formless slopes stretching up and away towards the sky; brown and
withered they looked, as if ﬁre had passed over them, leaving no
living blade of green: an unfriendly waste without even a broken tree
or a bold stone to relieve the emptiness. They had come to the Brown
Lands that lay, vast and desolate, between Southern Mirkwood and
the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed of
the Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell.
Upon the west to their right the land was treeless also, but it was
ﬂat, and in many places green with wide plains of grass. On this side
of the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut
out all view to the west, as the little boats went rustling by along
their ﬂuttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed
in the light cold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through
openings Frodo could catch sudden glimpses of rolling meads, and
far beyond them hills in the sunset, and away on the edge of sight
a dark line, where marched the southernmost ranks of the Misty
Mountains.

THE GREAT RIVER

381

There was no sign of living moving things, save birds. Of these
there were many: small fowl whistling and piping in the reeds, but
they were seldom seen. Once or twice the travellers heard the rush
and whine of swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx
streaming along the sky.
‘Swans!’ said Sam. ‘And mighty big ones too!’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn, ‘and they are black swans.’
‘How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks!’ said
Frodo. ‘I always imagined that as one journeyed south it got warmer
and merrier, until winter was left behind for ever.’
‘But we have not journeyed far south yet,’ answered Aragorn. ‘It
is still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world is cold
until the sudden spring, and we may yet have snow again. Far away
down in the Bay of Belfalas, to which Anduin runs, it is warm and
merry, maybe, or would be but for the Enemy. But here we are not
above sixty leagues, I guess, south of the Southfarthing away in your
Shire, hundreds of long miles yonder. You are looking now southwest across the north plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the land of
the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlight
that runs down from Fangorn to join the Great River. That is the
north boundary of Rohan; and of old all that lay between Limlight
and the White Mountains belonged to the Rohirrim. It is a rich and
pleasant land, and its grass has no rival; but in these evil days folk
do not dwell by the River or ride often to its shores. Anduin is wide,
yet the orcs can shoot their arrows far across the stream; and of late,
it is said, they have dared to cross the water and raid the herds and
studs of Rohan.’
Sam looked from bank to bank uneasily. The trees had seemed
hostile before, as if they harboured secret eyes and lurking dangers;
now he wished that the trees were still there. He felt that the Company
was too naked, aﬂoat in little open boats in the midst of shelterless
lands, and on a river that was the frontier of war.
In the next day or two, as they went on, borne steadily southwards,
this feeling of insecurity grew on all the Company. For a whole day
they took to their paddles and hastened forward. The banks slid by.
Soon the River broadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches
lay upon the east, and there were gravel-shoals in the water, so that
careful steering was needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds,
over which ﬂowed a chill air from the East. On the other side the
meads had become rolling downs of withered grass amidst a land of
fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of the lawns and fountains,
the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlórien. There was little speech
and no laughter in any of the boats. Each member of the Company
was busy with his own thoughts.

382

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The heart of Legolas was running under the stars of a summer
night in some northern glade amid the beech-woods; Gimli was
ﬁngering gold in his mind, and wondering if it were ﬁt to be wrought
into the housing of the Lady’s gift. Merry and Pippin in the middle
boat were ill at ease, for Boromir sat muttering to himself, sometimes
biting his nails, as if some restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes seizing a paddle and driving the boat close behind Aragorn’s.
Then Pippin, who sat in the bow looking back, caught a queer gleam
in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo. Sam had long ago
made up his mind that, though boats were maybe not as dangerous
as he had been brought up to believe, they were far more uncomfortable than even he had imagined. He was cramped and miserable,
having nothing to do but stare at the winter-lands crawling by and
the grey water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in
use they did not trust Sam with one.
As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over
the bowed heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he
was drowsy and longed for camp and the feel of earth under his toes.
Suddenly something caught his sight: at ﬁrst he stared at it listlessly,
then he sat up and rubbed his eyes; but when he looked again he
could not see it any more.
That night they camped on a small eyot close to the western bank.
Sam lay rolled in blankets beside Frodo. ‘I had a funny dream an
hour or two before we stopped, Mr. Frodo,’ he said. ‘Or maybe it
wasn’t a dream. Funny it was anyway.’
‘Well, what was it?’ said Frodo, knowing that Sam would not settle
down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. ‘I haven’t seen or
thought of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlórien.’
‘It wasn’t funny that way, Mr. Frodo. It was queer. All wrong, if
it wasn’t a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a
log with eyes!’
‘The log’s all right,’ said Frodo. ‘There are many in the River.
But leave out the eyes!’
‘That I won’t,’ said Sam. ‘’Twas the eyes as made me sit up, so
to speak. I saw what I took to be a log ﬂoating along in the half-light
behind Gimli’s boat; but I didn’t give much heed to it. Then it
seemed as if the log was slowly catching us up. And that was peculiar,
as you might say, seeing as we were all ﬂoating on the stream together.
Just then I saw the eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a
hump at the near end of the log. What’s more, it wasn’t a log, for it
had paddle-feet, like a swan’s almost, only they seemed bigger, and
kept dipping in and out of the water.
‘That’s when I sat right up and rubbed my eyes, meaning to give

THE GREAT RIVER

383

a shout, if it was still there when I had rubbed the drowse out of my
head. For the whatever-it-was was coming along fast now and getting
close behind Gimli. But whether those two lamps spotted me moving
and staring, or whether I came to my senses, I don’t know. When I
looked again, it wasn’t there. Yet I think I caught a glimpse, with
the tail of my eye, as the saying is, of something dark shooting under
the shadow of the bank. I couldn’t see no more eyes, though.
‘I said to myself: ‘‘dreaming again, Sam Gamgee,’’ I said; and I
said no more just then. But I’ve been thinking since, and now I’m
not so sure. What do you make of it, Mr. Frodo?’
‘I should make nothing of it but a log and the dusk and sleep in
your eyes, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘if this was the ﬁrst time that those eyes
had been seen. But it isn’t. I saw them away back north before we
reached Lórien. And I saw a strange creature with eyes climbing to
the ﬂet that night. Haldir saw it too. And do you remember the report
of the Elves that went after the orc-band?’
‘Ah,’ said Sam, ‘I do; and I remember more too. I don’t like my
thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo’s
stories and all, I fancy I could put a name on the creature, at a guess.
A nasty name. Gollum, maybe?’
‘Yes, that is what I have feared for some time,’ said Frodo. ‘Ever
since the night on the ﬂet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and
picked up our trail then; but I hoped that our stay in Lórien would
throw him off the scent again. The miserable creature must have
been hiding in the woods by the Silverlode, watching us start off !’
‘That’s about it,’ said Sam. ‘And we’d better be a bit more watchful
ourselves, or we’ll feel some nasty ﬁngers round our necks one of
these nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. And that’s what I
was leading up to. No need to trouble Strider or the others tonight.
I’ll keep watch. I can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage
in a boat, as you might say.’
‘I might,’ said Frodo, ‘and I might say ‘‘luggage with eyes’’. You
shall watch; but only if you promise to wake me half-way towards
morning, if nothing happens before then.’
In the dead hours Frodo came out of a deep dark sleep to ﬁnd
Sam shaking him. ‘It’s a shame to wake you,’ whispered Sam, ‘but
that’s what you said. There’s nothing to tell, or not much. I thought
I heard some soft plashing and a snifﬁng noise, a while back; but
you hear a lot of such queer sounds by a river at night.’
He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets, and
fought off his sleep. Minutes or hours passed slowly, and nothing
happened. Frodo was just yielding to the temptation to lie down
again when a dark shape, hardly visible, ﬂoated close to one of the

384

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

moored boats. A long whitish hand could be dimly seen as it shot
out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes shone coldly
as they peered inside, and then they lifted and gazed up at Frodo on
the eyot. They were not more than a yard or two away, and Frodo
heard the soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting
from its sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut
off. There was another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot
away downstream into the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned
over, and sat up.
‘What is it?’ he whispered, springing up and coming to Frodo. ‘I
felt something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword?’
‘Gollum,’ answered Frodo. ‘Or at least, so I guess.’
‘Ah!’ said Aragorn. ‘So you know about our little footpad, do you?
He padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel.
Since we took to boats, he has been lying on a log and paddling with
hands and feet. I have tried to catch him once or twice at night; but
he is slier than a fox, and as slippery as a ﬁsh. I hoped the river-voyage
would beat him, but he is too clever a waterman.
‘We shall have to try going faster tomorrow. You lie down now,
and I will keep watch for what is left of the night. I wish I could lay
my hands on the wretch. We might make him useful. But if I cannot,
we shall have to try and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart
from murder by night on his own account, he may put any enemy
that is about on our track.’
The night passed without Gollum showing so much as a shadow
again. After that the Company kept a sharp look-out, but they saw
no more of Gollum while the voyage lasted. If he was still following,
he was very wary and cunning. At Aragorn’s bidding they paddled
now for long spells, and the banks went swiftly by. But they saw little
of the country, for they journeyed mostly by night and twilight, resting
by day, and lying as hidden as the land allowed. In this way the time
passed without event until the seventh day.
The weather was still grey and overcast, with wind from the East,
but as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and
pools of faint light, yellow and pale green, opened under the grey
shores of cloud. There the white rind of the new Moon could be
seen glimmering in the remote lakes. Sam looked at it and puckered
his brows.
The next day the country on either side began to change rapidly.
The banks began to rise and grow stony. Soon they were passing
through a hilly rocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes
buried in deep brakes of thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and
creepers. Behind them stood low crumbling cliffs, and chimneys of

THE GREAT RIVER

385

grey weathered stone dark with ivy; and beyond these again there
rose high ridges crowned with wind-writhen ﬁrs. They were drawing
near to the grey hill-country of the Emyn Muil, the southern march
of Wilderland.
There were many birds about the cliffs and the rock-chimneys,
and all day high in the air ﬂocks of birds had been circling, black
against the pale sky. As they lay in their camp that day Aragorn
watched the ﬂights doubtfully, wondering if Gollum had been doing
some mischief and the news of their voyage was now moving in the
wilderness. Later as the sun was setting, and the Company was stirring and getting ready to start again, he descried a dark spot against
the fading light: a great bird high and far off, now wheeling, now
ﬂying on slowly southwards.
‘What is that, Legolas?’ he asked, pointing to the northern sky. ‘Is
it, as I think, an eagle?’
‘Yes,’ said Legolas. ‘It is an eagle, a hunting eagle. I wonder what
that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.’
‘We will not start until it is fully dark,’ said Aragorn.
The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless;
the grey east wind had passed away. The thin crescent of the Moon
had fallen early into the pale sunset, but the sky was clear above, and
though far away in the South there were great ranges of cloud that
still shone faintly, in the West stars glinted bright.
‘Come!’ said Aragorn. ‘We will venture one more journey by night.
We are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well; for
I have never journeyed by water in these parts before, not between
here and the rapids of Sarn Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning,
those are still many miles ahead. Still there are dangerous places even
before we come there: rocks and stony eyots in the stream. We must
keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle swiftly.’
To Sam in the leading boat was given the task of watchman. He
lay forward peering into the gloom. The night grew dark, but the
stars above were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer on the
face of the River. It was close on midnight, and they had been drifting
for some while, hardly using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried
out. Only a few yards ahead dark shapes loomed up in the stream
and he heard the swirl of racing water. There was a swift current
which swung left, towards the eastern shore where the channel was
clear. As they were swept aside the travellers could see, now very
close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were
thrust out far into the stream like a ridge of teeth. The boats were
all huddled together.
‘Hoy there, Aragorn!’ shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped into

386

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the leader. ‘This is madness! We cannot dare the Rapids by night!
But no boat can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or day.’
‘Back, back!’ cried Aragorn. ‘Turn! Turn if you can!’ He drove
his paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round.
‘I am out of my reckoning,’ he said to Frodo. ‘I did not know that
we had come so far: Anduin ﬂows faster than I thought. Sarn Gebir
must be close at hand already.’
With great efforts they checked the boats and slowly brought them
about; but at ﬁrst they could make only small headway against the
current, and all the time they were carried nearer and nearer to the
eastern bank. Now dark and ominous it loomed up in the night.
‘All together, paddle!’ shouted Boromir. ‘Paddle! Or we shall be
driven on the shoals.’ Even as he spoke Frodo felt the keel beneath
him grate upon stone.
At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows
whistled over them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo
between the shoulders and he lurched forward with a cry, letting go
his paddle: but the arrow fell back, foiled by his hidden coat of mail.
Another passed through Aragorn’s hood; and a third stood fast in
the gunwale of the second boat, close by Merry’s hand. Sam thought
he could glimpse black ﬁgures running to and fro upon the long
shingle-banks that lay under the eastern shore. They seemed very
near.
‘Yrch! ’ said Legolas, falling into his own tongue.
‘Orcs!’ cried Gimli.
‘Gollum’s doing, I’ll be bound,’ said Sam to Frodo. ‘And a nice
place to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into
their arms!’
They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam took a
hand. Every moment they expected to feel the bite of black-feathered
arrows. Many whined overhead or struck the water nearby; but there
were no more hits. It was dark, but not too dark for the night-eyes
of Orcs, and in the star-glimmer they must have offered their cunning
foes some mark, unless it was that the grey cloaks of Lórien and the
grey timber of the elf-wrought boats defeated the malice of the archers
of Mordor.
Stroke by stroke they laboured on. In the darkness it was hard to
be sure that they were indeed moving at all; but slowly the swirl of
the water grew less, and the shadow of the eastern bank faded back
into the night. At last, as far as they could judge, they had reached
the middle of the stream again and had driven their boats back some
distance above the jutting rocks. Then half turning they thrust
them with all their strength towards the western shore. Under the

THE GREAT RIVER

387

shadow of bushes leaning out over the water they halted and drew
breath.
Legolas laid down his paddle and took up the bow that he had
brought from Lórien. Then he sprang ashore and climbed a few paces
up the bank. Stringing the bow and ﬁtting an arrow he turned, peering
back over the River into the darkness. Across the water there were
shrill cries, but nothing could be seen.
Frodo looked up at the Elf standing tall above him, as he gazed
into the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned
with sharp white stars that glittered in the black pools of the sky
behind. But now rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds
advanced, sending out dark outriders into the starry ﬁelds. A sudden
dread fell on the Company.
‘Elbereth Gilthoniel! ’ sighed Legolas as he looked up. Even as he
did so, a dark shape, like a cloud and yet not a cloud, for it moved
far more swiftly, came out of the blackness in the South, and sped
towards the Company, blotting out all light as it approached. Soon
it appeared as a great winged creature, blacker than the pits in the
night. Fierce voices rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo
felt a sudden chill running through him and clutching at his heart;
there was a deadly cold, like the memory of an old wound, in his
shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide.
Suddenly the great bow of Lórien sang. Shrill went the arrow from
the elven-string. Frodo looked up. Almost above him the winged
shape swerved. There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of
the air, vanishing down into the gloom of the eastern shore. The sky
was clean again. There was a tumult of many voices far away, cursing
and wailing in the darkness, and then silence. Neither shaft nor cry
came again from the east that night.
After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt their
way along the water’s edge for some distance, until they found a
small shallow bay. A few low trees grew there close to the water, and
behind them rose a steep rocky bank. Here the Company decided to
stay and await the dawn: it was useless to attempt to move further
by night. They made no camp and lit no ﬁre, but lay huddled in the
boats, moored close together.
‘Praised be the bow of Galadriel, and the hand and eye of Legolas!’
said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of lembas. ‘That was a mighty
shot in the dark, my friend!’
‘But who can say what it hit?’ said Legolas.
‘I cannot,’ said Gimli. ‘But I am glad that the shadow came no
nearer. I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow
in Moria – the shadow of the Balrog,’ he ended in a whisper.

388

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘It was not a Balrog,’ said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that
had come upon him. ‘It was something colder. I think it was——’
Then he paused and fell silent.
‘What do you think?’ asked Boromir eagerly, leaning from his boat,
as if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo’s face.
‘I think—No, I will not say,’ answered Frodo. ‘Whatever it was,
its fall has dismayed our enemies.’
‘So it seems,’ said Aragorn. ‘Yet where they are, and how many,
and what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all
be sleepless! Dark hides us now. But what the day will show who
can tell? Have your weapons close to hand!’
Sam sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he were counting on
his ﬁngers, and looking up at the sky. ‘It’s very strange,’ he murmured. ‘The Moon’s the same in the Shire and in Wilderland, or it
ought to be. But either it’s out of its running, or I’m all wrong in my
reckoning. You’ll remember, Mr. Frodo, the Moon was waning as
we lay on the ﬂet up in that tree: a week from the full, I reckon. And
we’d been a week on the way last night, when up pops a New Moon
as thin as a nail-paring, as if we had never stayed no time in the
Elvish country.
‘Well, I can remember three nights there for certain, and I seem
to remember several more, but I would take my oath it was never a
whole month. Anyone would think that time did not count in there!’
‘And perhaps that was the way of it,’ said Frodo. ‘In that land,
maybe, we were in a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was
not, I think, until Silverlode bore us back to Anduin that we returned
to the time that ﬂows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I
don’t remember any moon, either new or old, in Caras Galadhon:
only stars by night and sun by day.’
Legolas stirred in his boat. ‘Nay, time does not tarry ever,’ he said;
‘but change and growth is not in all things and places alike. For the
Elves the world moves, and it moves both very swift and very slow.
Swift, because they themselves change little, and all else ﬂeets by: it
is a grief to them. Slow, because they need not count the running
years, not for themselves. The passing seasons are but ripples ever
repeated in the long long stream. Yet beneath the Sun all things must
wear to an end at last.’
‘But the wearing is slow in Lórien,’ said Frodo. ‘The power of the
Lady is on it. Rich are the hours, though short they seem, in Caras
Galadhon, where Galadriel wields the Elven-ring.’
‘That should not have been said outside Lórien, not even to me,’
said Aragorn. ‘Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land
you lost your count. There time ﬂowed swiftly by us, as for the Elves.

THE GREAT RIVER

389

The old moon passed, and a new moon waxed and waned in the
world outside, while we tarried there. And yestereve a new moon
came again. Winter is nearly gone. Time ﬂows on to a spring of little
hope.’
The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again across
the water. The travellers huddled in their boats felt the changing
of the weather. The air grew warm and very still under the great
moist clouds that had ﬂoated up from the South and the distant seas.
The rushing of the River over the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow
louder and closer. The twigs of the trees above them began to drip.
When the day came the mood of the world about them had become
soft and sad. Slowly the dawn grew to a pale light, diffused and
shadowless. There was mist on the River, and white fog swathed the
shore; the far bank could not be seen.
‘I can’t abide fog,’ said Sam; ‘but this seems to be a lucky one.
Now perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing
us.’
‘Perhaps so,’ said Aragorn. ‘But it will be hard to ﬁnd the path
unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must ﬁnd the path, if we
are to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.’
‘I do not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the River
any further,’ said Boromir. ‘If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we
can abandon these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward,
until we come to the Entwash and cross into my own land.’
‘We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,’ said Aragorn, ‘but
that is not yet agreed. And such a course may be more perilous than
it sounds. The vale of Entwash is ﬂat and fenny, and fog is a deadly
peril there for those on foot and laden. I would not abandon our
boats until we must. The River is at least a path that cannot be
missed.’
‘But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,’ objected Boromir. ‘And
even if you pass the Gates of Argonath and come unmolested to the
Tindrock, what will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in
the marshes?’
‘No!’ answered Aragorn. ‘Say rather that we will bear our boats
by the ancient way to Rauros-foot, and there take to the water again.
Do you not know, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North
Stair, and the high seat upon Amon Hen, that were made in the days
of the great kings? I at least have a mind to stand in that high place
again, before I decide my further course. There, maybe, we shall see
some sign that will guide us.’
Boromir held out long against this choice; but when it became
plain that Frodo would follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave

390

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

in. ‘It is not the way of the Men of Minas Tirith to desert their friends
at need,’ he said, ‘and you will need my strength, if ever you are to
reach the Tindrock. To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There
I shall turn to my home, alone if my help has not earned the reward
of any companionship.’
The day was now growing, and the fog had lifted a little. It was
decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along
the shore, while the others remained by the boats. Aragorn hoped to
ﬁnd some way by which they could carry both their boats and their
baggage to the smoother water beyond the Rapids.
‘Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,’ he said, ‘but that does
not say that we should come through Sarn Gebir alive. None have
ever done so yet. No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this
region, for even in their great days their realm did not reach up
Anduin beyond the Emyn Muil; but there is a portage-way somewhere on the western shore, if I can ﬁnd it. It cannot yet have
perished; for light boats used to journey out of Wilderland down to
Osgiliath, and still did so until a few years ago, when the Orcs of
Mordor began to multiply.’
‘Seldom in my life has any boat come out of the North, and the
Orcs prowl on the east-shore,’ said Boromir. ‘If you go forward, peril
will grow with every mile, even if you ﬁnd a path.’
‘Peril lies ahead on every southward road,’ answered Aragorn.
‘Wait for us one day. If we do not return in that time, you will know
that evil has indeed befallen us. Then you must take a new leader
and follow him as best you can.’
It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas
climb the steep bank and vanish into the mists; but his fears proved
groundless. Only two or three hours had passed, and it was barely
mid-day, when the shadowy shapes of the explorers appeared again.
‘All is well,’ said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank. ‘There
is a track, and it leads to a good landing that is still serviceable. The
distance is not great: the head of the Rapids is but half a mile below
us, and they are little more than a mile long. Not far beyond them
the stream becomes clear and smooth again, though it runs swiftly.
Our hardest task will be to get our boats and baggage to the old
portage-way. We have found it, but it lies well back from the waterside here, and runs under the lee of a rock-wall, a furlong or more
from the shore. We did not ﬁnd where the northward landing lies.
If it still remains, we must have passed it yesterday night. We might
labour far upstream and yet miss it in the fog. I fear we must leave
the River now, and make for the portage-way as best we can from
here.’

THE GREAT RIVER

391

‘That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,’ said Boromir.
‘Yet such as we are we will try it,’ said Aragorn.
‘Aye, we will,’ said Gimli. ‘The legs of Men will lag on a rough
road, while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight,
Master Boromir!’
The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The
goods were taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank,
where there was a level space. Then the boats were drawn out of the
water and carried up. They were far less heavy than any had expected.
Of what tree growing in the Elvish country they were made not even
Legolas knew; but the wood was tough and yet strangely light. Merry
and Pippin alone could carry their boat with ease along the ﬂat.
Nonetheless it needed the strength of the two Men to lift and haul
them over the ground that the Company now had to cross. It sloped
up away from the River, a tumbled waste of grey limestone-boulders,
with many hidden holes shrouded with weeds and bushes; there were
thickets of brambles, and sheer dells; and here and there boggy pools
fed by waters trickling from the terraces further inland.
One by one Boromir and Aragorn carried the boats, while the
others toiled and scrambled after them with the baggage. At last all
was removed and laid on the portage-way. Then with little further
hindrance, save from sprawling briars and many fallen stones, they
moved forward all together. Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling
rock-wall, and to their left mist shrouded the River: they could hear
it rushing and foaming over the sharp shelves and stony teeth of Sarn
Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they made the journey, before
all was brought safe to the southern landing.
There the portage-way, turning back to the water-side, ran gently
down to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been
scooped in the river-side, not by hand, but by the water swirling
down from Sarn Gebir against a low pier of rock that jutted out some
way into the stream. Beyond it the shore rose sheer into a grey cliff,
and there was no further passage for those on foot.
Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was
closing in. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush
and roar of the Rapids hidden in the mist; they were tired and sleepy,
and their hearts were as gloomy as the dying day.
‘Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,’ said
Boromir. ‘We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass
the Gates of Argonath by night, we are all too tired – except, no
doubt, our sturdy dwarf.’
Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat.
‘Let us rest as much as we can now,’ said Aragorn. ‘Tomorrow

392

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

we must journey by day again. Unless the weather changes once more
and cheats us, we shall have a good chance of slipping through,
unseen by any eyes on the eastern shore. But tonight two must watch
together in turns: three hours off and one on guard.’
Nothing happened that night worse than a brief drizzle of rain an
hour before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already
the fog was thinning. They kept as close as they could to the western
side, and they could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever
higher, shadowy walls with their feet in the hurrying river. In the
mid-morning the clouds drew down lower, and it began to rain
heavily. They drew the skin-covers over their boats to prevent them
from being ﬂooded, and drifted on; little could be seen before them
or about them through the grey falling curtains.
The rain, however, did not last long. Slowly the sky above grew
lighter, and then suddenly the clouds broke, and their draggled fringes
trailed away northward up the River. The fogs and mists were gone.
Before the travellers lay a wide ravine, with great rocky sides to which
clung, upon shelves and in narrow crevices, a few thrawn trees. The
channel grew narrower and the River swifter. Now they were speeding
along with little hope of stopping or turning, whatever they might
meet ahead. Over them was a lane of pale-blue sky, around them the
dark overshadowed River, and before them black, shutting out the
sun, the hills of Emyn Muil, in which no opening could be seen.
Frodo peering forward saw in the distance two great rocks
approaching: like great pinnacles or pillars of stone they seemed. Tall
and sheer and ominous they stood upon either side of the stream. A
narrow gap appeared between them, and the River swept the boats
towards it.
‘Behold the Argonath, the Pillars of the Kings!’ cried Aragorn.
‘We shall pass them soon. Keep the boats in line, and as far apart as
you can! Hold the middle of the stream!’
As Frodo was borne towards them the great pillars rose like towers
to meet him. Giants they seemed to him, vast grey ﬁgures silent but
threatening. Then he saw that they were indeed shaped and
fashioned: the craft and power of old had wrought upon them, and
still they preserved through the suns and rains of forgotten years the
mighty likenesses in which they had been hewn. Upon great pedestals
founded in the deep waters stood two great kings of stone: still with
blurred eyes and crannied brows they frowned upon the North. The
left hand of each was raised palm outwards in gesture of warning; in
each right hand there was an axe; upon each head there was a crumbling helm and crown. Great power and majesty they still wore, the
silent wardens of a long-vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon

THE GREAT RIVER

393

Frodo, and he cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to
look up as the boat drew near. Even Boromir bowed his head as the
boats whirled by, frail and ﬂeeting as little leaves, under the enduring
shadow of the sentinels of Númenor. So they passed into the dark
chasm of the Gates.
Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side.
Far off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and
a wind screamed over them. Frodo crouching over his knees heard
Sam in front muttering and groaning: ‘What a place! What a horrible
place! Just let me get out of this boat, and I’ll never wet my toes in
a puddle again, let alone a river!’
‘Fear not!’ said a strange voice behind him. Frodo turned and saw
Strider, and yet not Strider; for the weatherworn Ranger was no
longer there. In the stern sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and
erect, guiding the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back,
and his dark hair was blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes: a
king returning from exile to his own land.
‘Fear not!’ he said. ‘Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses
of Isildur and Anárion, my sires of old. Under their shadow Elessar,
the Elfstone son of Arathorn of the House of Valandil Isildur’s son,
heir of Elendil, has naught to dread!’
Then the light of his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: ‘Would
that Gandalf were here! How my heart yearns for Minas Anor and
the walls of my own city! But whither now shall I go?’
The chasm was long and dark, and ﬁlled with the noise of wind
and rushing water and echoing stone. It bent somewhat towards the
west so that at ﬁrst all was dark ahead; but soon Frodo saw a tall
gap of light before him, ever growing. Swiftly it drew near, and suddenly the boats shot through, out into a wide clear light.
The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy
sky. The pent waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale Nen
Hithoel, fenced by steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees,
but their heads were bare, cold-gleaming in the sunlight. At the far
southern end rose three peaks. The midmost stood somewhat forward
from the others and sundered from them, an island in the waters,
about which the ﬂowing River ﬂung pale shimmering arms. Distant
but deep there came up on the wind a roaring sound like the roll of
thunder heard far away.
‘Behold Tol Brandir!’ said Aragorn, pointing south to the tall peak.
‘Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen,
the Hills of Hearing and of Sight. In the days of the great kings there
were high seats upon them, and watch was kept there. But it is said
that no foot of man or beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir.

394

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Ere the shade of night falls we shall come to them. I hear the endless
voice of Rauros calling.’
The Company rested now for a while, drifting south on the current
that ﬂowed through the middle of the lake. They ate some food, and
then they took to their paddles and hastened on their way. The sides
of the westward hills fell into shadow, and the Sun grew round and
red. Here and there a misty star peered out. The three peaks loomed
before them, darkling in the twilight. Rauros was roaring with a great
voice. Already night was laid on the ﬂowing waters when the travellers
came at last under the shadow of the hills.
The tenth day of their journey was over. Wilderland was behind
them. They could go no further without choice between the east-way
and the west. The last stage of the Quest was before them.

Chapter 10
THE BREAKING OF
THE FELLOWSHIP
Aragorn led them to the right arm of the River. Here upon its western
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the
water from the feet of Amon Hen. Behind it rose the ﬁrst gentle
slopes of the hill clad with trees, and trees marched away westward
along the curving shores of the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down
and fed the grass.
‘Here we will rest tonight,’ said Aragorn. ‘This is the lawn of Parth
Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope that no
evil has yet come here.’
They drew up their boats on the green banks, and beside them
they made their camp. They set a watch, but had no sight nor sound
of their enemies. If Gollum had contrived to follow them, he remained
unseen and unheard. Nonetheless as the night wore on Aragorn grew
uneasy, tossing often in his sleep and waking. In the small hours he
got up and came to Frodo, whose turn it was to watch.
‘Why are you waking?’ asked Frodo. ‘It is not your watch.’
‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn; ‘but a shadow and a threat
has been growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.’
‘Why?’ said Frodo. ‘Are enemies at hand?’
‘Let us see what Sting may show,’ answered Aragorn.
Frodo then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the
edges gleamed dimly in the night. ‘Orcs!’ he said. ‘Not very near,
and yet too near, it seems.’
‘I feared as much,’ said Aragorn. ‘But maybe they are not on this
side of the River. The light of Sting is faint, and it may point to no
more than spies of Mordor roaming on the slopes of Amon Lhaw. I
have never heard before of Orcs upon Amon Hen. Yet who knows
what may happen in these evil days, now that Minas Tirith no longer
holds secure the passages of Anduin. We must go warily tomorrow.’
The day came like ﬁre and smoke. Low in the East there were
black bars of cloud like the fumes of a great burning. The rising sun
lit them from beneath with ﬂames of murky red; but soon it climbed
above them into a clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped
with gold. Frodo looked out eastward and gazed at the tall island.
Its sides sprang sheer out of the running water. High up above the

396

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

tall cliffs were steep slopes upon which trees climbed, mounting one
head above another; and above them again were grey faces of
inaccessible rock, crowned by a great spire of stone. Many birds were
circling about it, but no sign of other living things could be seen.
When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. ‘The
day has come at last,’ he said: ‘the day of choice which we have long
delayed. What shall now become of our Company that has travelled
so far in fellowship? Shall we turn west with Boromir and go to the
wars of Gondor; or turn east to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we
break our fellowship and go this way and that as each may choose?
Whatever we do must be done soon. We cannot long halt here. The
enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I fear that the Orcs may
already be on this side of the water.’
There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved.
‘Well, Frodo,’ said Aragorn at last. ‘I fear that the burden is laid
upon you. You are the Bearer appointed by the Council. Your own
way you alone can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am
not Gandalf, and though I have tried to bear his part, I do not know
what design or hope he had for this hour, if indeed he had any. Most
likely it seems that if he were here now the choice would still wait
on you. Such is your fate.’
Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. ‘I know that
haste is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me
an hour longer, and I will speak. Let me be alone!’
Aragorn looked at him with kindly pity. ‘Very well, Frodo son of
Drogo,’ he said. ‘You shall have an hour, and you shall be alone. We
will stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.’
Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had been
watching his master with great concern, shook his head and muttered:
‘Plain as a pikestaff it is, but it’s no good Sam Gamgee putting in
his spoke just now.’
Presently Frodo got up and walked away; and Sam saw that while
the others restrained themselves and did not stare at him, the eyes
of Boromir followed Frodo intently, until he passed out of sight in
the trees at the foot of Amon Hen.
Wandering aimlessly at ﬁrst in the wood, Frodo found that his
feet were leading him up towards the slopes of the hill. He came to
a path, the dwindling ruins of a road of long ago. In steep places
stairs of stone had been hewn, but now they were cracked and worn,
and split by the roots of trees. For some while he climbed, not caring
which way he went, until he came to a grassy place. Rowan-trees
grew about it, and in the midst was a wide ﬂat stone. The little upland
lawn was open upon the East and was ﬁlled now with the early

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

397

sunlight. Frodo halted and looked out over the River, far below him,
to Tol Brandir and the birds wheeling in the great gulf of air between
him and the untrodden isle. The voice of Rauros was a mighty roaring
mingled with a deep throbbing boom.
He sat down upon the stone and cupped his chin in his hands,
staring eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened
since Bilbo left the Shire was passing through his mind, and he recalled and pondered everything that he could remember of Gandalf ’s
words. Time went on, and still he was no nearer to a choice.
Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to
him that something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon
him. He sprang up and turned; but all that he saw to his surprise
was Boromir, and his face was smiling and kind.
‘I was afraid for you, Frodo,’ he said, coming forward. ‘If Aragorn
is right and Orcs are near, then none of us should wander alone, and
you least of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too is heavy.
May I stay now and talk for a while, since I have found you? It would
comfort me. Where there are so many, all speech becomes a debate
without end. But two together may perhaps ﬁnd wisdom.’
‘You are kind,’ answered Frodo. ‘But I do not think that any
speech will help me. For I know what I should do, but I am afraid
of doing it, Boromir: afraid.’
Boromir stood silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered.
Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. ‘Are you sure that
you do not suffer needlessly?’ he said. ‘I wish to help you. You need
counsel in your hard choice. Will you not take mine?’
‘I think I know already what counsel you would give, Boromir,’
said Frodo. ‘And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of
my heart.’
‘Warning? Warning against what?’ said Boromir sharply.
‘Against delay. Against the way that seems easier. Against refusal
of the burden that is laid on me. Against – well, if it must be said,
against trust in the strength and truth of Men.’
‘Yet that strength has long protected you far away in your little
country, though you knew it not.’
‘I do not doubt the valour of your people. But the world is changing. The walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not strong
enough. If they fail, what then?’
‘We shall fall in battle valiantly. Yet there is still hope that they
will not fail.’
‘No hope while the Ring lasts,’ said Frodo.
‘Ah! The Ring!’ said Boromir, his eyes lighting. ‘The Ring! Is it
not a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt for

398

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

so small a thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an
instant in the house of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again?’
Frodo looked up. His heart went suddenly cold. He caught the
strange gleam in Boromir’s eyes, yet his face was still kind and
friendly. ‘It is best that it should lie hidden,’ he answered.
‘As you wish. I care not,’ said Boromir. ‘Yet may I not even speak
of it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands of
the Enemy: of its evil uses not of its good. The world is changing,
you say. Minas Tirith will fall, if the Ring lasts. But why? Certainly,
if the Ring were with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us?’
‘Were you not at the Council?’ answered Frodo. ‘Because we
cannot use it, and what is done with it turns to evil.’
Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. ‘So you go on,’ he
cried. ‘Gandalf, Elrond – all these folk have taught you to say so.
For themselves they may be right. These elves and half-elves and
wizards, they would come to grief perhaps. Yet often I doubt if they
are wise and not merely timid. But each to his own kind. True-hearted
Men, they will not be corrupted. We of Minas Tirith have been
staunch through long years of trial. We do not desire the power of
wizard-lords, only strength to defend ourselves, strength in a just
cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the Ring of
Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad not
to use it, to use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless,
the ruthless, these alone will achieve victory. What could not a warrior
do in this hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if
he refuses, why not Boromir? The Ring would give me power of
Command. How I would drive the hosts of Mordor, and all men
would ﬂock to my banner!’
Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly. Almost
he seemed to have forgotten Frodo, while his talk dwelt on walls and
weapons, and the mustering of men; and he drew plans for great
alliances and glorious victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and
became himself a mighty king, benevolent and wise. Suddenly he
stopped and waved his arms.
‘And they tell us to throw it away!’ he cried. ‘I do not say destroy
it. That might be well, if reason could show any hope of doing so.
It does not. The only plan that is proposed to us is that a halﬂing
should walk blindly into Mordor and offer the Enemy every chance
of recapturing it for himself. Folly!
‘Surely you see it, my friend?’ he said, turning now suddenly to
Frodo again. ‘You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest
should pardon you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?’
‘No, I am afraid,’ said Frodo. ‘Simply afraid. But I am glad to
have heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.’

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

399

‘Then you will come to Minas Tirith?’ cried Boromir. His eyes
were shining and his face eager.
‘You misunderstand me,’ said Frodo.
‘But you will come, at least for a while?’ Boromir persisted. ‘My
city is not far now; and it is little further from there to Mordor than
from here. We have been long in the wilderness, and you need news
of what the Enemy is doing before you make a move. Come with
me, Frodo,’ he said. ‘You need rest before your venture, if go you
must.’ He laid his hand on the hobbit’s shoulder in friendly fashion;
but Frodo felt the hand trembling with suppressed excitement. He
stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the tall Man, nearly twice
his height and many times his match in strength.
‘Why are you so unfriendly?’ said Boromir. ‘I am a true man,
neither thief nor tracker. I need your Ring: that you know now; but
I give you my word that I do not desire to keep it. Will you not at
least let me make trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring!’
‘No! no!’ cried Frodo. ‘The Council laid it upon me to bear it.’
‘It is by our own folly that the Enemy will defeat us,’ cried Boromir.
‘How it angers me! Fool! Obstinate fool! Running wilfully to death
and ruining our cause. If any mortals have claim to the Ring, it is
the men of Númenor, and not Halﬂings. It is not yours save by
unhappy chance. It might have been mine. It should be mine. Give
it to me!’
Frodo did not answer, but moved away till the great ﬂat stone
stood between them. ‘Come, come, my friend!’ said Boromir in a
softer voice. ‘Why not get rid of it? Why not be free of your doubt
and fear? You can lay the blame on me, if you will. You can say that
I was too strong and took it by force. For I am too strong for you,
halﬂing,’ he cried; and suddenly he sprang over the stone and leaped
at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face was hideously changed; a raging
ﬁre was in his eyes.
Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There
was only one thing he could do: trembling he pulled out the Ring
upon its chain and quickly slipped it on his ﬁnger, even as Boromir
sprang at him again. The Man gasped, stared for a moment amazed,
and then ran wildly about, seeking here and there among the rocks
and trees.
‘Miserable trickster!’ he shouted. ‘Let me get my hands on you!
Now I see your mind. You will take the Ring to Sauron and sell us
all. You have only waited your chance to leave us in the lurch. Curse
you and all halﬂings to death and darkness!’ Then, catching his foot
on a stone, he fell sprawling and lay upon his face. For a while he
was as still as if his own curse had struck him down; then suddenly
he wept.

400

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He rose and passed his hand over his eyes, dashing away the tears.
‘What have I said?’ he cried. ‘What have I done? Frodo, Frodo!’ he
called. ‘Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come
back!’
There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was
already far away, leaping blindly up the path to the hill-top. Terror
and grief shook him, seeing in his thought the mad ﬁerce face of
Boromir, and his burning eyes.
Soon he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted,
gasping for breath. He saw as through a mist a wide ﬂat circle, paved
with mighty ﬂags, and surrounded with a crumbling battlement; and
in the middle, set upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached
by a stair of many steps. Up he went and sat upon the ancient
chair, feeling like a lost child that had clambered upon the throne of
mountain-kings.
At ﬁrst he could see little. He seemed to be in a world of mist in
which there were only shadows: the Ring was upon him. Then here
and there the mist gave way and he saw many visions: small and
clear as if they were under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote.
There was no sound, only bright living images. The world seemed
to have shrunk and fallen silent. He was sitting upon the Seat of
Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men of Númenor.
Eastward he looked into wide uncharted lands, nameless plains, and
forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great River lay
like a ribbon beneath him, and the Misty Mountains stood small and
hard as broken teeth. Westward he looked and saw the broad pastures
of Rohan; and Orthanc, the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike.
Southward he looked, and below his very feet the Great River curled
like a toppling wave and plunged over the falls of Rauros into a
foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the fume. And Ethir
Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of sea-birds
whirling like a white dust in the sun, and beneath them a green and
silver sea, rippling in endless lines.
But everywhere he looked he saw the signs of war. The Misty
Mountains were crawling like anthills: orcs were issuing out of a
thousand holes. Under the boughs of Mirkwood there was deadly
strife of Elves and Men and fell beasts. The land of the Beornings
was aﬂame; a cloud was over Moria; smoke rose on the borders of
Lórien.
Horsemen were galloping on the grass of Rohan; wolves poured
from Isengard. From the havens of Harad ships of war put out to
sea; and out of the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen,
spearmen, bowmen upon horses, chariots of chieftains and laden

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

401

wains. All the power of the Dark Lord was in motion. Then turning
south again he beheld Minas Tirith. Far away it seemed, and beautiful: white-walled, many-towered, proud and fair upon its mountainseat; its battlements glittered with steel, and its turrets were bright
with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas
Tirith was set another fortress, greater and more strong. Thither,
eastward, unwilling his eye was drawn. It passed the ruined bridges
of Osgiliath, the grinning gates of Minas Morgul, and the haunted
Mountains, and it looked upon Gorgoroth, the valley of terror in the
Land of Mordor. Darkness lay there under the Sun. Fire glowed
amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, and a great reek rising.
Then at last his gaze was held: wall upon wall, battlement upon
battlement, black, immeasurably strong, mountain of iron, gate of
steel, tower of adamant, he saw it: Barad-dûr, Fortress of Sauron.
All hope left him.
And suddenly he felt the Eye. There was an eye in the Dark Tower
that did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze. A
ﬁerce eager will was there. It leaped towards him; almost like a ﬁnger
he felt it, searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know
just exactly where he was. Amon Lhaw it touched. It glanced upon
Tol Brandir – he threw himself from the seat, crouching, covering
his head with his grey hood.
He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily I come,
I come to you? He could not tell. Then as a ﬂash from some other
point of power there came to his mind another thought: Take it off !
Take it off ! Fool, take it off ! Take off the Ring!
The two powers strove in him. For a moment, perfectly balanced
between their piercing points, he writhed, tormented. Suddenly he
was aware of himself again, Frodo, neither the Voice nor the Eye:
free to choose, and with one remaining instant in which to do so.
He took the Ring off his ﬁnger. He was kneeling in clear sunlight
before the high seat. A black shadow seemed to pass like an arm
above him; it missed Amon Hen and groped out west, and faded.
Then all the sky was clean and blue and birds sang in every tree.
Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him, but his will
was ﬁrm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. ‘I will do
now what I must,’ he said. ‘This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring
is already at work even in the Company, and the Ring must leave
them before it does more harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot trust,
and those I can trust are too dear to me: poor old Sam, and Merry
and Pippin. Strider, too: his heart yearns for Minas Tirith, and he
will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen into evil. I will go alone.
At once.’
He went quickly down the path and came back to the lawn where

402

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Boromir had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he
could hear cries and calls from the woods near the shore below.
‘They’ll be hunting for me,’ he said. ‘I wonder how long I have
been away. Hours, I should think.’ He hesitated. ‘What can I do?’
he muttered. ‘I must go now or I shall never go. I shan’t get a chance
again. I hate leaving them, and like this without any explanation. But
surely they will understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?’
Slowly he drew out the Ring and put it on once more. He vanished
and passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind.
The others remained long by the river-side. For some time they
had been silent, moving restlessly about; but now they were sitting
in a circle, and they were talking. Every now and again they made
efforts to speak of other things, of their long road and many adventures; they questioned Aragorn concerning the realm of Gondor and
its ancient history, and the remnants of its great works that could
still be seen in this strange border-land of the Emyn Muil: the stone
kings and the seats of Lhaw and Hen, and the great Stair beside the
falls of Rauros. But always their thoughts and words strayed back to
Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose to do? Why was he
hesitating?
‘He is debating which course is the most desperate, I think,’ said
Aragorn. ‘And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for
the Company to go east, since we have been tracked by Gollum, and
must fear that the secret of our journey is already betrayed. But Minas
Tirith is no nearer to the Fire and the destruction of the Burden.
‘We may remain there for a while and make a brave stand; but
the Lord Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even
Elrond said was beyond his power: either to keep the Burden secret,
or to hold off the full might of the Enemy when he comes to take it.
Which way would any of us choose in Frodo’s place? I do not know.
Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.’
‘Grievous is our loss,’ said Legolas. ‘Yet we must needs make up
our minds without his aid. Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo?
Let us call him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.’
‘And so should I,’ said Gimli. ‘We, of course, were only sent to
help the Bearer along the road, to go no further than we wished; and
none of us is under any oath or command to seek Mount Doom.
Hard was my parting from Lothlórien. Yet I have come so far, and
I say this: now we have reached the last choice, it is clear to me that
I cannot leave Frodo. I would choose Minas Tirith, but if he does
not, then I follow him.’
‘And I too will go with him,’ said Legolas. ‘It would be faithless
now to say farewell.’

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

403

‘It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,’ said Aragorn.
‘But if he goes east, then all need not go with him; nor do I think
that all should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as
for three or two, or one alone. If you would let me choose, then I
should appoint three companions: Sam, who could not bear it otherwise; and Gimli; and myself. Boromir will return to his own city,
where his father and his people need him; and with him the others
should go, or at least Meriadoc and Peregrin, if Legolas is not willing
to leave us.’
‘That won’t do at all!’ cried Merry. ‘We can’t leave Frodo! Pippin
and I always intended to go wherever he went, and we still do. But
we did not realize what that would mean. It seemed different so far
away, in the Shire or in Rivendell. It would be mad and cruel to let
Frodo go to Mordor. Why can’t we stop him?’
‘We must stop him,’ said Pippin. ‘And that is what he is worrying
about, I am sure. He knows we shan’t agree to his going east. And
he doesn’t like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine
it: going off to Mordor alone!’ Pippin shuddered. ‘But the dear silly
old hobbit, he ought to know that he hasn’t got to ask. He ought to
know that if we can’t stop him, we shan’t leave him.’
‘Begging your pardon,’ said Sam. ‘I don’t think you understand
my master at all. He isn’t hesitating about which way to go. Of course
not! What’s the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean,
begging your pardon, Master Boromir,’ he added, and turned. It was
then that they discovered that Boromir, who at ﬁrst had been sitting
silent on the outside of the circle, was no longer there.
‘Now where’s he got to?’ cried Sam, looking worried. ‘He’s been
a bit queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he’s not in this business.
He’s off to his home, as he always said; and no blame to him. But
Mr. Frodo, he knows he’s got to ﬁnd the Cracks of Doom, if he can.
But he’s afraid. Now it’s come to the point, he’s just plain terriﬁed.
That’s what his trouble is. Of course he’s had a bit of schooling, so
to speak – we all have – since we left home, or he’d be so terriﬁed
he’d just ﬂing the Ring in the River and bolt. But he’s still too
frightened to start. And he isn’t worrying about us either: whether
we’ll go along with him or no. He knows we mean to. That’s another
thing that’s bothering him. If he screws himself up to go, he’ll want
to go alone. Mark my words! We’re going to have trouble when he
comes back. For he’ll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name’s
Baggins.’
‘I believe you speak more wisely than any of us, Sam,’ said
Aragorn. ‘And what shall we do, if you prove right?’
‘Stop him! Don’t let him go!’ cried Pippin.
‘I wonder?’ said Aragorn. ‘He is the Bearer, and the fate of the

404

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one
way or the other. Nor do I think that we should succeed, if we tried.
There are other powers at work far stronger.’
‘Well, I wish Frodo would ‘‘screw himself up’’ and come back,
and let us get it over,’ said Pippin. ‘This waiting is horrible! Surely
the time is up?’
‘Yes,’ said Aragorn. ‘The hour is long passed. The morning is
wearing away. We must call for him.’
At that moment Boromir reappeared. He came out from the trees
and walked towards them without speaking. His face looked grim
and sad. He paused as if counting those that were present, and then
sat down aloof, with his eyes on the ground.
‘Where have you been, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn. ‘Have you seen
Frodo?’
Boromir hesitated for a second. ‘Yes, and no,’ he answered slowly.
‘Yes: I found him some way up the hill, and I spoke to him. I urged
him to come to Minas Tirith and not to go east. I grew angry and
he left me. He vanished. I have never seen such a thing happen
before, though I have heard of it in tales. He must have put the Ring
on. I could not ﬁnd him again. I thought he would return to you.’
‘Is that all that you have to say?’ said Aragorn, looking hard and
not too kindly at Boromir.
‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘I will say no more yet.’
‘This is bad!’ cried Sam, jumping up. ‘I don’t know what this Man
has been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put the thing on? He didn’t
ought to have; and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!’
‘But he wouldn’t keep it on,’ said Merry. ‘Not when he had
escaped the unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.’
‘But where did he go? Where is he?’ cried Pippin. ‘He’s been away
ages now.’
‘How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir?’ asked Aragorn.
‘Half an hour, maybe,’ he answered. ‘Or it might be an hour. I
have wandered for some time since. I do not know! I do not know!’
He put his head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.
‘An hour since he vanished!’ shouted Sam. ‘We must try and ﬁnd
him at once. Come on!’
‘Wait a moment!’ cried Aragorn. ‘We must divide up into pairs,
and arrange – here, hold on! Wait!’
It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed off
ﬁrst. Merry and Pippin had followed, and were already disappearing
westward into the trees by the shore, shouting: Frodo! Frodo! in their
clear, high, hobbit-voices. Legolas and Gimli were running. A sudden
panic or madness seemed to have fallen on the Company.

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

405

‘We shall all be scattered and lost,’ groaned Aragorn. ‘Boromir! I
do not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help
now! Go after those two young hobbits, and guard them at the least,
even if you cannot ﬁnd Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you ﬁnd
him, or any traces of him. I shall return soon.’
Aragorn sprang swiftly away and went in pursuit of Sam. Just as
he reached the little lawn among the rowans he overtook him, toiling
uphill, panting and calling, Frodo!
‘Come with me, Sam!’ he said. ‘None of us should be alone. There
is mischief about. I feel it. I am going to the top, to the Seat of Amon
Hen, to see what may be seen. And look! It is as my heart guessed,
Frodo went this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open!’ He sped
up the path.
Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger,
and soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out
of sight ahead. Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his
hand to his head.
‘Whoa, Sam Gamgee!’ he said aloud. ‘Your legs are too short, so
use your head! Let me see now! Boromir isn’t lying, that’s not his
way; but he hasn’t told us everything. Something scared Mr. Frodo
badly. He screwed himself up to the point, sudden. He made up his
mind at last – to go. Where to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes,
without even his Sam. That’s hard, cruel hard.’
Sam passed his hand over his eyes, brushing away the tears.
‘Steady, Gamgee!’ he said. ‘Think, if you can! He can’t ﬂy across
rivers, and he can’t jump waterfalls. He’s got no gear. So he’s got to
get back to the boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like
lightning!’
Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his
knees. Up he got and ran on. He came to the edge of the lawn of
Parth Galen by the shore, where the boats were drawn up out of the
water. No one was there. There seemed to be cries in the woods
behind, but he did not heed them. He stood gazing for a moment,
stock-still, gaping. A boat was sliding down the bank all by itself.
With a shout Sam raced across the grass. The boat slipped into the
water.
‘Coming, Mr. Frodo! Coming!’ called Sam, and ﬂung himself
from the bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a
yard. With a cry and a splash he fell face downward into deep swift
water. Gurgling he went under, and the River closed over his curly
head.
An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle
swirled and the boat put about. Frodo was just in time to grasp Sam

406

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

by the hair as he came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring
in his round brown eyes.
‘Up you come, Sam my lad!’ said Frodo. ‘Now take my hand!’
‘Save me, Mr. Frodo!’ gasped Sam. ‘I’m drownded. I can’t see
your hand.’
‘Here it is. Don’t pinch, lad! I won’t let you go. Tread water and
don’t ﬂounder, or you’ll upset the boat. There now, get hold of the
side, and let me use the paddle!’
With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank, and
Sam was able to scramble out, wet as a water-rat. Frodo took off the
Ring and stepped ashore again.
‘Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam!’ he said.
‘Oh, Mr. Frodo, that’s hard!’ said Sam shivering. ‘That’s hard,
trying to go without me and all. If I hadn’t a guessed right, where
would you be now?’
‘Safely on my way.’
‘Safely!’ said Sam. ‘All alone and without me to help you? I
couldn’t have a borne it, it’d have been the death of me.’
‘It would be the death of you to come with me, Sam,’ said Frodo,
‘and I could not have borne that.’
‘Not as certain as being left behind,’ said Sam.
‘But I am going to Mordor.’
‘I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course you are. And I’m
coming with you.’
‘Now, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘don’t hinder me! The others will be
coming back at any minute. If they catch me here, I shall have to
argue and explain, and I shall never have the heart or the chance to
get off. But I must go at once. It’s the only way.’
‘Of course it is,’ answered Sam. ‘But not alone. I’m coming too,
or neither of us isn’t going. I’ll knock holes in all the boats ﬁrst.’
Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched
his heart. ‘Leave one!’ he said. ‘We’ll need it. But you can’t come
like this without your gear or food or anything.’
‘Just hold on a moment, and I’ll get my stuff !’ cried Sam eagerly.
‘It’s all ready. I thought we should be off today.’ He rushed to the
camping place, ﬁshed out his pack from the pile where Frodo had
laid it when he emptied the boat of his companions’ goods, grabbed
a spare blanket, and some extra packages of food, and ran back.
‘So all my plan is spoilt!’ said Frodo. ‘It is no good trying to escape
you. But I’m glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It
is plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the
others ﬁnd a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don’t suppose
we shall see them again.’
‘Yet we may, Mr. Frodo. We may,’ said Sam.
*
*
*

THE BREAKING OF THE FELLOWSHIP

407

So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together.
Frodo paddled away from the shore, and the River bore them swiftly
away, down the western arm, and past the frowning cliffs of Tol
Brandir. The roar of the great falls drew nearer. Even with such help
as Sam could give, it was hard work to pass across the current at the
southward end of the island and drive the boat eastward towards the
far shore.
At length they came to land again upon the southern slopes of
Amon Lhaw. There they found a shelving shore, and they drew the
boat out, high above the water, and hid it as well as they could behind
a great boulder. Then shouldering their burdens, they set off, seeking
a path that would bring them over the grey hills of the Emyn Muil,
and down into the Land of Shadow.

Chapter 1
THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR
Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the
ground. Hobbits go light, and their footprints are not easy even for
a Ranger to read, but not far from the top a spring crossed the path,
and in the wet earth he saw what he was seeking.
‘I read the signs aright,’ he said to himself. ‘Frodo ran to the
hill-top. I wonder what he saw there? But he returned by the same
way, and went down the hill again.’
Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself,
hoping to see there something that would guide him in his perplexities; but time was pressing. Suddenly he leaped forward, and
ran to the summit, across the great ﬂag-stones, and up the steps.
Then sitting in the high seat he looked out. But the sun seemed
darkened, and the world dim and remote. He turned from the North
back again to North, and saw nothing save the distant hills, unless
it were that far away he could see again a great bird like an eagle
high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the
earth.
Even as he gazed his quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands
below, on the west side of the River. He stiffened. There were cries,
and among them, to his horror, he could distinguish the harsh voices
of Orcs. Then suddenly with a deep-throated call a great horn blew,
and the blasts of it smote the hills and echoed in the hollows, rising
in a mighty shout above the roaring of the falls.
‘The horn of Boromir!’ he cried. ‘He is in need!’ He sprang down
the steps and away, leaping down the path. ‘Alas! An ill fate is on
me this day, and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?’
As he ran the cries came louder, but fainter now and desperately
the horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs,
and suddenly the horn-calls ceased. Aragorn raced down the last
slope, but before he could reach the hill’s foot, the sounds died away;
and as he turned to the left and ran towards them they retreated,
until at last he could hear them no more. Drawing his bright sword
and crying Elendil! Elendil! he crashed through the trees.
A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the
lake he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back to a great tree,
as if he was resting. But Aragorn saw that he was pierced with many
black-feathered arrows; his sword was still in his hand, but it was

414

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

broken near the hilt; his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many
Orcs lay slain, piled all about him and at his feet.
Aragorn knelt beside him. Boromir opened his eyes and strove to
speak. At last slow words came. ‘I tried to take the Ring from Frodo,’ he
said. ‘I am sorry. I have paid.’ His glance strayed to his fallen enemies;
twenty at least lay there. ‘They have gone: the Halﬂings: the Orcs have
taken them. I think they are not dead. Orcs bound them.’ He paused
and his eyes closed wearily. After a moment he spoke again.
‘Farewell, Aragorn! Go to Minas Tirith and save my people! I
have failed.’
‘No!’ said Aragorn, taking his hand and kissing his brow. ‘You
have conquered. Few have gained such a victory. Be at peace! Minas
Tirith shall not fall!’
Boromir smiled.
‘Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?’ said Aragorn.
But Boromir did not speak again.
‘Alas!’ said Aragorn. ‘Thus passes the heir of Denethor, Lord of
the Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all
in ruin. It is I that have failed. Vain was Gandalf ’s trust in me. What
shall I do now? Boromir has laid it on me to go to Minas Tirith, and
my heart desires it; but where are the Ring and the Bearer? How
shall I ﬁnd them and save the Quest from disaster?’
He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir’s
hand. So it was that Legolas and Gimli found him. They came from
the western slopes of the hill, silently, creeping through the trees as
if they were hunting. Gimli had his axe in hand, and Legolas his long
knife: all his arrows were spent. When they came into the glade they
halted in amazement; and then they stood a moment with heads
bowed in grief, for it seemed to them plain what had happened.
‘Alas!’ said Legolas, coming to Aragorn’s side. ‘We have hunted
and slain many Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more
use here. We came when we heard the horn – but too late, it seems.
I fear you have taken deadly hurt.’
‘Boromir is dead,’ said Aragorn. ‘I am unscathed, for I was not
here with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon
the hill.’
‘The hobbits!’ cried Gimli. ‘Where are they then? Where is Frodo?’
‘I do not know,’ answered Aragorn wearily. ‘Before he died
Boromir told me that the Orcs had bound them; he did not think
that they were dead. I sent him to follow Merry and Pippin; but I did
not ask him if Frodo or Sam were with him: not until it was too late.
All that I have done today has gone amiss. What is to be done now?’
‘First we must tend the fallen,’ said Legolas. ‘We cannot leave
him lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.’

THE DEPARTURE OF BOROMIR

419

Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the campingplace and looked at the baggage. ‘Two packs are missing,’ he said,
‘and one is certainly Sam’s: it was rather large and heavy. This then
is the answer: Frodo has gone by boat, and his servant has gone with
him. Frodo must have returned while we were all away. I met Sam
going up the hill and told him to follow me; but plainly he did not
do so. He guessed his master’s mind and came back here before
Frodo had gone. He did not ﬁnd it easy to leave Sam behind!’
‘But why should he leave us behind, and without a word?’ said
Gimli. ‘That was a strange deed!’
‘And a brave deed,’ said Aragorn. ‘Sam was right, I think. Frodo
did not wish to lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he
knew that he must go himself. Something happened after he left us
that overcame his fear and doubt.’
‘Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he ﬂed,’ said Legolas.
‘He ﬂed, certainly,’ said Aragorn, ‘but not, I think, from Orcs.’
What he thought was the cause of Frodo’s sudden resolve and ﬂight
Aragorn did not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret.
‘Well, so much at least is now clear,’ said Legolas: ‘Frodo is no
longer on this side of the River: only he can have taken the boat.
And Sam is with him; only he would have taken his pack.’
‘Our choice then,’ said Gimli, ‘is either to take the remaining boat
and follow Frodo, or else to follow the Orcs on foot. There is little
hope either way. We have already lost precious hours.’
‘Let me think!’ said Aragorn. ‘And now may I make a right choice,
and change the evil fate of this unhappy day!’ He stood silent for a
moment. ‘I will follow the Orcs,’ he said at last. ‘I would have guided
Frodo to Mordor and gone with him to the end; but if I seek him
now in the wilderness, I must abandon the captives to torment and
death. My heart speaks clearly at last: the fate of the Bearer is in my
hands no longer. The Company has played its part. Yet we that
remain cannot forsake our companions while we have strength left.
Come! We will go now. Leave all that can be spared behind! We will
press on by day and dark!’
They drew up the last boat and carried it to the trees. They laid
beneath it such of their goods as they did not need and could not
carry away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading
as they came back to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they
picked up the trail of the Orcs. It needed little skill to ﬁnd.
‘No other folk make such a trampling,’ said Legolas. ‘It seems
their delight to slash and beat down growing things that are not even
in their way.’
‘But they go with a great speed for all that,’ said Aragorn, ‘and

THE RIDERS OF ROHAN

439

hour lessens your hope. This is my choice. You may go; and what
is more, I will lend you horses. This only I ask: when your quest is
achieved, or is proved vain, return with the horses over the Entwade
to Meduseld, the high house in Edoras where Théoden now sits.
Thus you shall prove to him that I have not misjudged. In this I
place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of your good
faith. Do not fail.’
‘I will not,’ said Aragorn.
There was great wonder, and many dark and doubtful glances,
´
among his men, when Eomer
gave orders that the spare horses were
´
to be lent to the strangers; but only Eothain
dared to speak openly.
‘It may be well enough for this lord of the race of Gondor, as he
claims,’ he said, ‘but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being
given to a Dwarf ?’
‘No one,’ said Gimli. ‘And do not trouble: no one will ever hear
of it. I would sooner walk than sit on the back of any beast so great,
free or begrudged.’
‘But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,’ said Aragorn.
‘Come, you shall sit behind me, friend Gimli,’ said Legolas. ‘Then
all will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled
by one.’
A great dark-grey horse was brought to Aragorn, and he mounted
´
it. ‘Hasufel is his name,’ said Eomer.
‘May he bear you well and to
better fortune than Gárulf, his late master!’
A smaller and lighter horse, but restive and ﬁery, was brought to
Legolas. Arod was his name. But Legolas asked them to take off
saddle and rein. ‘I need them not,’ he said, and leaped lightly up,
and to their wonder Arod was tame and willing beneath him, moving
here and there with but a spoken word: such was the Elvish way with
all good beasts. Gimli was lifted up behind his friend, and he clung
to him, not much more at ease than Sam Gamgee in a boat.
´
‘Farewell, and may you ﬁnd what you seek!’ cried Eomer.
‘Return
with what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine
together!’
‘I will come,’ said Aragorn.
‘And I will come, too,’ said Gimli. ‘The matter of the Lady Galadriel
lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech.’
´
‘We shall see,’ said Eomer.
‘So many strange things have chanced
that to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a
Dwarf ’s axe will seem no great wonder. Farewell!’
With that they parted. Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When
´
after a little Gimli looked back, the company of Eomer
were already

472

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He was immensely interested in everything: in the Black Riders,
in Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and Tom Bombadil, in
the Mines of Moria, and in Lothlórien and Galadriel. He made them
describe the Shire and its country over and over again. He said an
odd thing at this point. ‘You never see any, hm, any Ents round
there, do you?’ he asked. ‘Well, not Ents, Entwives I should really
say.’
‘Entwives?’ said Pippin. ‘Are they like you at all?’
‘Yes, hm, well no: I do not really know now,’ said Treebeard
thoughtfully. ‘But they would like your country, so I just wondered.’
Treebeard was however especially interested in everything that
concerned Gandalf; and most interested of all in Saruman’s doings.
The hobbits regretted very much that they knew so little about them:
only a rather vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told the
Council. But they were clear at any rate that Uglúk and his troop
came from Isengard, and spoke of Saruman as their master.
‘Hm, hoom!’ said Treebeard, when at last their story had wound
and wandered down to the battle of the Orcs and the Riders of
Rohan. ‘Well, well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You
have not told me all, no indeed, not by a long way. But I do not
doubt that you are doing as Gandalf would wish. There is something
very big going on, that I can see, and what it is maybe I shall learn
in good time, or in bad time. By root and twig, but it is a strange
business: up sprout a little folk that are not in the old lists, and behold!
the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and Gandalf takes
them on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras
Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the leagues of Wilderland:
indeed they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they
weather it!’
‘And what about yourself ?’ asked Merry.
‘Hoom, hm, I have not troubled about the Great Wars,’ said
Treebeard; ‘they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business
of Wizards: Wizards are always troubled about the future. I do not
like worrying about the future. I am not altogether on anybody’s side,
because nobody is altogether on my side, if you understand me:
nobody cares for the woods as I care for them, not even Elves nowadays. Still, I take more kindly to Elves than to others: it was the
Elves that cured us of dumbness long ago, and that was a great gift
that cannot be forgotten, though our ways have parted since. And
there are some things, of course, whose side I am altogether not on;
I am against them altogether: these – burárum’ (he again made a deep
rumble of disgust) ‘——these Orcs, and their masters.
‘I used to be anxious when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but
when it removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while: Mordor

482

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

difference between an old cow sitting and thoughtfully chewing, and
a bull charging; and the change might come suddenly. I wonder if
Treebeard will rouse them. I am sure he means to try. But they don’t
like being roused. Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then
bottled it up again.’
The hobbits turned back. The voices of the Ents were still rising
and falling in their conclave. The sun had now risen high enough to
look over the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of the birches and
lit the northward side of the dingle with a cool yellow light. There
they saw a little glittering fountain. They walked along the rim of
the great bowl at the feet of the evergreens – it was pleasant to feel
cool grass about their toes again, and not to be in a hurry – and then
they climbed down to the gushing water. They drank a little, a clean,
cold, sharp draught, and sat down on a mossy stone, watching the
patches of sun on the grass and the shadows of the sailing clouds
passing over the ﬂoor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents went
on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world,
and far from everything that had ever happened to them. A great
longing came over them for the faces and voices of their companions,
especially for Frodo and Sam, and for Strider.
At last there came a pause in the Ent-voices; and looking up they
saw Treebeard coming towards them, with another Ent at his side.
‘Hm, hoom, here I am again,’ said Treebeard. ‘Are you getting
weary, or feeling impatient, hmm, eh? Well, I am afraid that you
must not get impatient yet. We have ﬁnished the ﬁrst stage now; but
I have still got to explain things again to those that live a long way
off, far from Isengard, and those that I could not get round to before
the Moot, and after that we shall have to decide what to do. However,
deciding what to do does not take Ents so long as going over all the
facts and events that they have to make up their minds about. Still,
it is no use denying, we shall be here a long time yet: a couple of
days very likely. So I have brought you a companion. He has an
ent-house nearby. Bregalad is his Elvish name. He says he has already
made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm,
hm, he is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought to
get on together. Good-bye!’ Treebeard turned and left them.
Bregalad stood for some time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and
they looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of
‘hastiness’. He was tall, and seemed to be one of the younger Ents;
he had smooth shining skin on his arms and legs; his lips were ruddy,
and his hair was grey-green. He could bend and sway like a slender
tree in the wind. At last he spoke, and his voice though resonant was
higher and clearer than Treebeard’s.
‘Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go for a walk!’ he said. ‘I am Bregalad,

490

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

it is a comfort to know that he had some lembas in his pocket, even
though he ran away without gear or pack; that, perhaps, is like a
hobbit. I say he, though I hope and guess that both Merry and Pippin
were here together. There is, however, nothing to show that for
certain.’
‘And how do you suppose that either of our friends came to have
a hand free?’ asked Gimli.
‘I do not know how it happened,’ answered Aragorn. ‘Nor do I
know why an Orc was carrying them away. Not to help them to
escape, we may be sure. Nay, rather I think that I now begin to
understand a matter that has puzzled me from the beginning: why
when Boromir had fallen were the Orcs content with the capture of
Merry and Pippin? They did not seek out the rest of us, nor attack
our camp; but instead they went with all speed towards Isengard.
Did they suppose they had captured the Ring-bearer and his faithful
comrade? I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such
plain orders to Orcs, even if they knew so much themselves; they
would not speak openly to them of the Ring: they are not trusty
servants. But I think the Orcs had been commanded to capture hobbits, alive, at all costs. An attempt was made to slip out with the
precious prisoners before the battle. Treachery perhaps, likely enough
with such folk; some large and bold Orc may have been trying to
escape with the prize alone, for his own ends. There, that is my tale.
Others might be devised. But on this we may count in any case: one
at least of our friends escaped. It is our task to ﬁnd him and help
him before we return to Rohan. We must not be daunted by Fangorn,
since need drove him into that dark place.’
‘I do not know which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought
of the long road through Rohan on foot,’ said Gimli.
‘Then let us go to the forest,’ said Aragorn.
It was not long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point,
near the bank of the Entwash, he came upon footprints: hobbit-prints,
but too light for much to be made of them. Then again beneath
the bole of a great tree on the very edge of the wood more prints
were discovered. The earth was bare and dry, and did not reveal
much.
‘One hobbit at least stood here for a while and looked back; and
then he turned away into the forest,’ said Aragorn.
‘Then we must go in, too,’ said Gimli. ‘But I do not like the look
of this Fangorn; and we were warned against it. I wish the chase had
led anywhere else!’
‘I do not think the wood feels evil, whatever tales may say,’ said
Legolas. He stood under the eaves of the forest, stooping forward,

496

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before
him still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is
all that I can say.’
‘Not alone,’ said Legolas. ‘We think that Sam went with him.’
‘Did he!’ said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a
smile on his face. ‘Did he indeed? It is news to me, yet it does not
surprise me. Good! Very good! You lighten my heart. You must tell
me more. Now sit by me and tell me the tale of your journey.’
The companions sat on the ground at his feet, and Aragorn took
up the tale. For a long while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no
questions. His hands were spread upon his knees, and his eyes were
closed. At last when Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of
his last journey upon the Great River, the old man sighed.
‘You have not said all that you know or guess, Aragorn my friend,’
he said quietly. ‘Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to
him. It was a sore trial for such a man: a warrior, and a lord of men.
Galadriel told me that he was in peril. But he escaped in the end. I
am glad. It was not in vain that the young hobbits came with us, if
only for Boromir’s sake. But that is not the only part they have to
play. They were brought to Fangorn, and their coming was like the
falling of small stones that starts an avalanche in the mountains. Even
as we talk here, I hear the ﬁrst rumblings. Saruman had best not be
caught away from home when the dam bursts!’
‘In one thing you have not changed, dear friend,’ said Aragorn:
‘you still speak in riddles.’
‘What? In riddles?’ said Gandalf. ‘No! For I was talking aloud to
myself. A habit of the old: they choose the wisest person present to
speak to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.’
He laughed, but the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam
of sunshine.
‘I am no longer young even in the reckoning of Men of the Ancient
Houses,’ said Aragorn. ‘Will you not open your mind more clearly
to me?’
‘What then shall I say?’ said Gandalf, and paused for a while in
thought. ‘This in brief is how I see things at the moment, if you wish
to have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of
course, has long known that the Ring is abroad, and that it is borne
by a hobbit. He knows now the number of our Company that set
out from Rivendell, and the kind of each of us. But he does not yet
perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes that we were all going to
Minas Tirith; for that is what he would himself have done in our
place. And according to his wisdom it would have been a heavy stroke
against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what mighty

FLOTSAM AND JETSAM

571

should. Hm, this is a bundle of news and no mistake! Well, now
Treebeard must get busy again.’’
‘Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it did not
cheer us up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you
three than about Frodo and Sam, or about poor Boromir. For we
gathered that there was a great battle going on, or soon would be,
and that you were in it, and might never come out of it.
‘ ‘‘Huorns will help,’’ said Treebeard. Then he went away and we
did not see him again until this morning.
‘It was deep night. We lay on top of a pile of stone, and could see
nothing beyond it. Mist or shadows blotted out everything like a great
blanket all round us. The air seemed hot and heavy; and it was full
of rustlings, creakings, and a murmur like voices passing. I think that
hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in
the battle. Later there was a great rumble of thunder away south,
and ﬂashes of lightning far away across Rohan. Every now and then
we could see mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab out suddenly, black and white, and then vanish. And behind us there were
noises like thunder in hills, but different. At times the whole valley
echoed.
‘It must have been about midnight when the Ents broke the dams
and poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern
wall, down into Isengard. The Huorn-dark had passed, and the thunder had rolled away. The Moon was sinking behind the western
mountains.
‘Isengard began to ﬁll up with black creeping streams and pools.
They glittered in the last light of the Moon, as they spread over the
plain. Every now and then the waters found their way down into
some shaft or spouthole. Great white steams hissed up. Smoke rose
in billows. There were explosions and gusts of ﬁre. One great coil of
vapour went whirling up, twisting round and round Orthanc, until
it looked like a tall peak of cloud, ﬁery underneath and moonlit above.
And still more water poured in, until at last Isengard looked like a
huge ﬂat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.’
‘We saw a cloud of smoke and steam from the south last night,
when we came to the mouth of Nan Curunı́r,’ said Aragorn. ‘We
feared that Saruman was brewing some new devilry for us.’
‘Not he!’ said Pippin. ‘He was probably choking and not laughing
any more. By the morning, yesterday morning, the water had sunk
down into all the holes, and there was a dense fog. We took refuge
in that guardroom over there; and we had rather a fright. The lake
began to overﬂow and pour out through the old tunnel, and the water
was rapidly rising up the steps. We thought we were going to get

590

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Guards were set, two at a watch. The rest, after they had supped,
wrapped themselves in a cloak and blanket and slept. The hobbits
lay in a corner by themselves upon a pile of old bracken. Merry
was sleepy, but Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken
cracked and rustled, as he twisted and turned.
‘What’s the matter?’ asked Merry. ‘Are you lying on an ant-hill?’
‘No,’ said Pippin, ‘but I’m not comfortable. I wonder how long
it is since I slept in a bed?’
Merry yawned. ‘Work it out on your ﬁngers!’ he said. ‘But you
must know how long it is since we left Lórien.’
‘Oh, that!’ said Pippin. ‘I mean a real bed in a bedroom.’
‘Well, Rivendell then,’ said Merry. ‘But I could sleep anywhere
tonight.’
‘You had the luck, Merry,’ said Pippin softly, after a pause. ‘You
were riding with Gandalf.’
‘Well, what of it?’
‘Did you get any news, any information out of him?’
‘Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most
of it; you were close by, and we were talking no secrets. But you can
go with him tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him –
and if he’ll have you.’
‘Can I? Good! But he’s close, isn’t he? Not changed at all.’
‘Oh yes, he is!’ said Merry, waking up a little, and beginning
to wonder what was bothering his companion. ‘He has grown, or
something. He can be both kinder and more alarming, merrier and
more solemn than before, I think. He has changed; but we have not
had a chance to see how much, yet. But think of the last part of that
business with Saruman! Remember Saruman was once Gandalf ’s
superior: head of the Council, whatever that may be exactly. He was
Saruman the White. Gandalf is the White now. Saruman came when
he was told, and his rod was taken; and then he was just told to go,
and he went!’
‘Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he’s closer than ever
that’s all,’ Pippin argued. ‘That—glass ball, now. He seemed mighty
pleased with it. He knows or guesses something about it. But does
he tell us what? No, not a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved it
from rolling into a pool. Here, I’ll take that, my lad – that’s all. I
wonder what it is? It felt so very heavy.’ Pippin’s voice fell very low,
as if he was talking to himself.
‘Hullo!’ said Merry. ‘So that’s what is bothering you? Now, Pippin
my lad, don’t forget Gildor’s saying – the one Sam used to quote:
Do not meddle in the affairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to
anger.’
‘But our whole life for months has been one long meddling in the

Chapter 1
´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME
‘Well, master, we’re in a ﬁx and no mistake,’ said Sam Gamgee. He
stood despondently with hunched shoulders beside Frodo, and
peered out with puckered eyes into the gloom.
It was the third evening since they had ﬂed from the Company,
as far as they could tell: they had almost lost count of the hours
during which they had climbed and laboured among the barren slopes
and stones of the Emyn Muil, sometimes retracing their steps because
they could ﬁnd no way forward, sometimes discovering that they had
wandered in a circle back to where they had been hours before. Yet
on the whole they had worked steadily eastward, keeping as near as
they could ﬁnd a way to the outer edge of this strange twisted knot
of hills. But always they found its outward faces sheer, high and
impassable, frowning over the plain below; beyond its tumbled skirts
lay livid festering marshes where nothing moved and not even a bird
was to be seen.
The hobbits stood now on the brink of a tall cliff, bare and bleak,
its feet wrapped in mist; and behind them rose the broken highlands
crowned with drifting cloud. A chill wind blew from the East. Night
was gathering over the shapeless lands before them; the sickly green
of them was fading to a sullen brown. Far away to the right the
Anduin, that had gleamed ﬁtfully in sun-breaks during the day, was
now hidden in shadow. But their eyes did not look beyond the River,
back to Gondor, to their friends, to the lands of Men. South and
east they stared to where, at the edge of the oncoming night, a dark
line hung, like distant mountains of motionless smoke. Every now
and again a tiny red gleam far away ﬂickered upwards on the rim of
earth and sky.
‘What a ﬁx!’ said Sam. ‘That’s the one place in all the lands we’ve
ever heard of that we don’t want to see any closer; and that’s the
one place we’re trying to get to! And that’s just where we can’t get,
nohow. We’ve come the wrong way altogether, seemingly. We can’t
get down; and if we did get down, we’d ﬁnd all that green land a
nasty bog, I’ll warrant. Phew! Can you smell it?’ He sniffed at the
wind.
‘Yes, I can smell it,’ said Frodo, but he did not move, and his
eyes remained ﬁxed, staring out towards the dark line and the ﬂickering ﬂame. ‘Mordor!’ he muttered under his breath. ‘If I must go

604

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

there, I wish I could come there quickly and make an end!’ He
shuddered. The wind was chilly and yet heavy with an odour of cold
decay. ‘Well,’ he said, at last withdrawing his eyes, ‘we cannot stay
here all night, ﬁx or no ﬁx. We must ﬁnd a more sheltered spot, and
camp once more; and perhaps another day will show us a path.’
‘Or another and another and another,’ muttered Sam. ‘Or maybe
no day. We’ve come the wrong way.’
‘I wonder,’ said Frodo. ‘It’s my doom, I think, to go to that Shadow
yonder, so that a way will be found. But will good or evil show it to
me? What hope we had was in speed. Delay plays into the Enemy’s
hands – and here I am: delayed. Is it the will of the Dark Tower that
steers us? All my choices have proved ill. I should have left the
Company long before, and come down from the North, east of the
River and of the Emyn Muil, and so over the hard of Battle Plain to
the passes of Mordor. But now it isn’t possible for you and me alone
to ﬁnd a way back, and the Orcs are prowling on the east bank. Every
day that passes is a precious day lost. I am tired, Sam. I don’t know
what is to be done. What food have we got left?’
‘Only those, what d’you call ’em, lembas, Mr. Frodo. A fair supply.
But they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never thought,
though, when I ﬁrst set tooth in them, that I should ever come to
wish for a change. But I do now: a bit of plain bread, and a mug –
aye, half a mug – of beer would go down proper. I’ve lugged my
cooking-gear all the way from the last camp, and what use has it
been? Naught to make a ﬁre with, for a start; and naught to cook,
not even grass!’
They turned away and went down into a stony hollow. The westering sun was caught into clouds, and night came swiftly. They slept
as well as they could for the cold, turn and turn about, in a nook
among great jagged pinnacles of weathered rock; at least they were
sheltered from the easterly wind.
‘Did you see them again, Mr. Frodo?’ asked Sam, as they sat, stiff
and chilled, munching wafers of lembas, in the cold grey of early
morning.
‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘I’ve heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two
nights now.’
‘Nor me,’ said Sam. ‘Grrr! Those eyes did give me a turn! But
perhaps we’ve shaken him off at last, the miserable slinker. Gollum!
I’ll give him gollum in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.’
‘I hope you’ll never need to,’ said Frodo. ‘I don’t know how he
followed us; but it may be that he’s lost us again, as you say. In this
dry bleak land we can’t leave many footprints, nor much scent, even
for his snufﬂing nose.’

´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME

605

‘I hope that’s the way of it,’ said Sam. ‘I wish we could be rid of
him for good!’
‘So do I,’ said Frodo; ‘but he’s not my chief trouble. I wish we
could get away from these hills! I hate them. I feel all naked on the
east side, stuck up here with nothing but the dead ﬂats between me
and that Shadow yonder. There’s an Eye in it. Come on! We’ve got
to get down today somehow.’
But that day wore on, and when afternoon faded towards evening
they were still scrambling along the ridge and had found no way of
escape.
Sometimes in the silence of that barren country they fancied that
they heard faint sounds behind them, a stone falling, or the imagined
step of ﬂapping feet on the rock. But if they halted and stood still
listening, they heard no more, nothing but the wind sighing over the
edges of the stones – yet even that reminded them of breath softly
hissing through sharp teeth.
All that day the outer ridge of the Emyn Muil had been bending
gradually northward, as they struggled on. Along its brink there now
stretched a wide tumbled ﬂat of scored and weathered rock, cut every
now and again by trench-like gullies that sloped steeply down to deep
notches in the cliff-face. To ﬁnd a path in these clefts, which were
becoming deeper and more frequent, Frodo and Sam were driven to
their left, well away from the edge, and they did not notice that for
several miles they had been going slowly but steadily downhill: the
cliff-top was sinking towards the level of the lowlands.
At last they were brought to a halt. The ridge took a sharper bend
northward and was gashed by a deeper ravine. On the further side
it reared up again, many fathoms at a single leap: a great grey cliff
loomed before them, cut sheer down as if by a knife stroke. They
could go no further forwards, and must turn now either west or east.
But west would lead them only into more labour and delay, back
towards the heart of the hills; east would take them to the outer
precipice.
‘There’s nothing for it but to scramble down this gully, Sam,’ said
Frodo. ‘Let’s see what it leads to!’
‘A nasty drop, I’ll bet,’ said Sam.
The cleft was longer and deeper than it seemed. Some way down
they found a few gnarled and stunted trees, the ﬁrst they had seen
for days: twisted birch for the most part, with here and there a ﬁr-tree.
Many were dead and gaunt, bitten to the core by the eastern winds.
Once in milder days there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine,
but now, after some ﬁfty yards, the trees came to an end, though old
broken stumps straggled on almost to the cliff ’s brink. The bottom

606

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

of the gully, which lay along the edge of a rock-fault, was rough with
broken stone and slanted steeply down. When they came at last to
the end of it, Frodo stooped and leaned out.
‘Look!’ he said. ‘We must have come down a long way, or else
the cliff has sunk. It’s much lower here than it was, and it looks easier
too.’
Sam knelt beside him and peered reluctantly over the edge. Then
he glanced up at the great cliff rising up, away on their left. ‘Easier!’
he grunted. ‘Well, I suppose it’s always easier getting down than up.
Those as can’t ﬂy can jump!’
‘It would be a big jump still,’ said Frodo. ‘About, well’ – he stood
for a moment measuring it with his eyes – ‘about eighteen fathoms,
I should guess. Not more.’
‘And that’s enough!’ said Sam. ‘Ugh! How I do hate looking down
from a height! But looking’s better than climbing.’
‘All the same,’ said Frodo, ‘I think we could climb here; and I
think we shall have to try. See – the rock is quite different from what
it was a few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.’
The outer fall was indeed no longer sheer, but sloped outwards a
little. It looked like a great rampart or sea-wall whose foundations
had shifted, so that its courses were all twisted and disordered, leaving
great ﬁssures and long slanting edges that were in places almost as
wide as stairs.
‘And if we’re going to try and get down, we had better try at once.
It’s getting dark early. I think there’s a storm coming.’
The smoky blur of the mountains in the East was lost in a deeper
blackness that was already reaching out westwards with long arms.
There was a distant mutter of thunder borne on the rising breeze.
Frodo sniffed the air and looked up doubtfully at the sky. He strapped
his belt outside his cloak and tightened it, and settled his light pack
on his back; then he stepped towards the edge. ‘I’m going to try it,’
he said.
‘Very good!’ said Sam gloomily. ‘But I’m going ﬁrst.’
‘You?’ said Frodo. ‘What’s made you change your mind about
climbing?’
‘I haven’t changed my mind. But it’s only sense: put the one lowest
as is most likely to slip. I don’t want to come down atop of you and
knock you off – no sense in killing two with one fall.’
Before Frodo could stop him, he sat down, swung his legs over
the brink, and twisted round, scrabbling with his toes for a foothold.
It is doubtful if he ever did anything braver in cold blood, or more
unwise.
‘No, no! Sam, you old ass!’ said Frodo. ‘You’ll kill yourself for
certain, going over like that without even a look to see what to make

´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME

607

for. Come back!’ He took Sam under the armpits and hauled him
up again. ‘Now, wait a bit and be patient!’ he said. Then he lay on
the ground, leaning out and looking down; but the light seemed to
be fading quickly, although the sun had not yet set. ‘I think we could
manage this,’ he said presently. ‘I could at any rate; and you could
too, if you kept your head and followed me carefully.’
‘I don’t know how you can be so sure,’ said Sam. ‘Why! You can’t
see to the bottom in this light. What if you comes to a place where
there’s nowhere to put your feet or your hands?’
‘Climb back, I suppose,’ said Frodo.
‘Easy said,’ objected Sam. ‘Better wait till morning and more light.’
‘No! Not if I can help it,’ said Frodo with a sudden strange vehemence. ‘I grudge every hour, every minute. I’m going down to try it
out. Don’t you follow till I come back or call!’
Gripping the stony lip of the fall with his ﬁngers he let himself
gently down, until when his arms were almost at full stretch, his toes
found a ledge. ‘One step down!’ he said. ‘And this ledge broadens
out to the right. I could stand there without a hold. I’ll——’ his
words were cut short.
The hurrying darkness, now gathering great speed, rushed up from
the East and swallowed the sky. There was a dry splitting crack of
thunder right overhead. Searing lightning smote down into the hills.
Then came a blast of savage wind, and with it, mingling with its roar,
there came a high shrill shriek. The hobbits had heard just such a
cry far away in the Marish as they ﬂed from Hobbiton, and even
there in the woods of the Shire it had frozen their blood. Out here
in the waste its terror was far greater: it pierced them with cold blades
of horror and despair, stopping heart and breath. Sam fell ﬂat on his
face. Involuntarily Frodo loosed his hold and put his hands over his
head and ears. He swayed, slipped, and slithered downwards with a
wailing cry.
Sam heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. ‘Master,
master!’ he called. ‘Master!’
He heard no answer. He found he was shaking all over, but he
gathered his breath, and once again he shouted: ‘Master!’ The wind
seemed to blow his voice back into his throat, but as it passed, roaring
up the gully and away over the hills, a faint answering cry came to
his ears:
‘All right, all right! I’m here. But I can’t see.’
Frodo was calling with a weak voice. He was not actually very far
away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to his
feet on a wider ledge not many yards lower down. Fortunately the
rock-face at this point leaned well back and the wind had pressed

608

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

him against the cliff, so that he had not toppled over. He steadied
himself a little, laying his face against the cold stone, feeling his heart
pounding. But either the darkness had grown complete, or else his
eyes had lost their sight. All was black about him. He wondered if
he had been struck blind. He took a deep breath.
‘Come back! Come back!’ he heard Sam’s voice out of the blackness above.
‘I can’t,’ he said. ‘I can’t see. I can’t ﬁnd any hold. I can’t move yet.’
‘What can I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do?’ shouted Sam, leaning
out dangerously far. Why could not his master see? It was dim,
certainly, but not as dark as all that. He could see Frodo below him,
a grey forlorn ﬁgure splayed against the cliff. But he was far out of
the reach of any helping hand.
There was another crack of thunder; and then the rain came. In
a blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bitter
cold.
‘I’m coming down to you,’ shouted Sam, though how he hoped
to help in that way he could not have said.
‘No, no! wait!’ Frodo called back, more strongly now. ‘I shall be
better soon. I feel better already. Wait! You can’t do anything without
a rope.’
‘Rope!’ cried Sam, talking wildly to himself in his excitement and
relief. ‘Well, if I don’t deserve to be hung on the end of one as a
warning to numbskulls! You’re nowt but a ninnyhammer, Sam
Gamgee: that’s what the Gaffer said to me often enough, it being a
word of his. Rope!’
‘Stop chattering!’ cried Frodo, now recovered enough to feel both
amused and annoyed. ‘Never mind your gaffer! Are you trying to tell
yourself you’ve got some rope in your pocket? If so, out with it!’
‘Yes, Mr. Frodo, in my pack and all. Carried it hundreds of miles,
and I’d clean forgotten it!’
‘Then get busy and let an end down!’
Quickly Sam unslung his pack and rummaged in it. There indeed
at the bottom was a coil of the silken-grey rope made by the folk of
Lórien. He cast an end to his master. The darkness seemed to lift
from Frodo’s eyes, or else his sight was returning. He could see the
grey line as it came dangling down, and he thought it had a faint
silver sheen. Now that he had some point in the darkness to ﬁx his
eyes on, he felt less giddy. Leaning his weight forward, he made the
end fast round his waist, and then he grasped the line with both
hands.
Sam stepped back and braced his feet against a stump a yard or
two from the edge. Half hauled, half scrambling, Frodo came up and
threw himself on the ground.

´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME

609

Thunder growled and rumbled in the distance, and the rain was
still falling heavily. The hobbits crawled away back into the gully;
but they did not ﬁnd much shelter there. Rills of water began to
run down; soon they grew to a spate that splashed and fumed on
the stones, and spouted out over the cliff like the gutters of a vast
roof.
‘I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean
off,’ said Frodo. ‘What a piece of luck you had that rope!’
‘Better luck if I’d thought of it sooner,’ said Sam. ‘Maybe you
remember them putting the ropes in the boats, as we started off: in
the Elvish country. I took a fancy to it, and I stowed a coil in my
pack. Years ago, it seems. ‘‘It may be a help in many needs,’’ he
said: Haldir, or one of those folk. And he spoke right.’
‘A pity I didn’t think of bringing another length,’ said Frodo; ‘but
I left the Company in such a hurry and confusion. If only we had
enough we could use it to get down. How long is your rope, I wonder?’
Sam paid it out slowly, measuring it with his arms: ‘Five, ten,
twenty, thirty ells, more or less,’ he said.
‘Who’d have thought it!’ Frodo exclaimed.
‘Ah! Who would?’ said Sam. ‘Elves are wonderful folk. It looks a
bit thin, but it’s tough; and soft as milk to the hand. Packs close too,
and as light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!’
‘Thirty ells!’ said Frodo considering. ‘I believe it would be enough.
If the storm passes before nightfall, I’m going to try it.’
‘The rain’s nearly given over already,’ said Sam; ‘but don’t you
go doing anything risky in the dim again, Mr. Frodo! And I haven’t
got over that shriek on the wind yet, if you have. Like a Black Rider
it sounded – but one up in the air, if they can ﬂy. I’m thinking we’d
best lay up in this crack till night’s over.’
‘And I’m thinking that I won’t spend a moment longer than I
need, stuck up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking
over the marshes,’ said Frodo.
With that he stood up and went down to the bottom of the gully
again. He looked out. Clear sky was growing in the East once more.
The skirts of the storm were lifting, ragged and wet, and the main
battle had passed to spread its great wings over the Emyn Muil, upon
which the dark thought of Sauron brooded for a while. Thence it
turned, smiting the Vale of Anduin with hail and lightning, and casting its shadow upon Minas Tirith with threat of war. Then, lowering
in the mountains, and gathering its great spires, it rolled on slowly
over Gondor and the skirts of Rohan, until far away the Riders on
the plain saw its black towers moving behind the sun, as they rode
into the West. But here, over the desert and the reeking marshes the
deep blue sky of evening opened once more, and a few pallid stars

610

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

appeared, like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent
moon.
‘It’s good to be able to see again,’ said Frodo, breathing deep.
‘Do you know, I thought for a bit that I had lost my sight? From the
lightning or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at
all, until the grey rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.’
‘It does look sort of silver in the dark,’ said Sam. ‘Never noticed
it before, though I can’t remember as I’ve ever had it out since I ﬁrst
stowed it. But if you’re so set on climbing, Mr. Frodo, how are you
going to use it? Thirty ells, or say, about eighteen fathom: that’s no
more than your guess at the height of the cliff.’
Frodo thought for a while. ‘Make it fast to that stump, Sam!’ he
said. ‘Then I think you shall have your wish this time and go ﬁrst.
I’ll lower you, and you need do no more than use your feet and hands
to fend yourself off the rock. Though, if you put your weight on some
of the ledges and give me a rest, it will help. When you’re down, I’ll
follow. I feel quite myself again now.’
‘Very well,’ said Sam heavily. ‘If it must be, let’s get it over!’ He
took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest to the brink;
then the other end he tied about his own waist. Reluctantly he turned
and prepared to go over the edge a second time.
It did not, however, turn out half as bad as he had expected. The
rope seemed to give him conﬁdence, though he shut his eyes more
than once when he looked down between his feet. There was one
awkward spot, where there was no ledge and the wall was sheer and
even undercut for a short space; there he slipped and swung out on
the silver line. But Frodo lowered him slowly and steadily, and it was
over at last. His chief fear had been that the rope-length would give
out while he was still high up, but there was still a good bight in
Frodo’s hands, when Sam came to the bottom and called up: ‘I’m
down!’ His voice came up clearly from below, but Frodo could not
see him; his grey elven-cloak had melted into the twilight.
Frodo took rather more time to follow him. He had the rope about
his waist and it was fast above, and he had shortened it so that it would
pull him up before he reached the ground; still he did not want to risk
a fall, and he had not quite Sam’s faith in this slender grey line. He
found two places, all the same, where he had to trust wholly to it:
smooth surfaces where there was no hold even for his strong hobbit
ﬁngers and the ledges were far apart. But at last he too was down.
‘Well!’ he cried. ‘We’ve done it! We’ve escaped from the Emyn
Muil! And now what next, I wonder? Maybe we shall soon be sighing
for good hard rock under foot again.’
But Sam did not answer: he was staring back up the cliff. ‘Ninny-

´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME

611

hammers!’ he said. ‘Noodles! My beautiful rope! There it is tied to
a stump, and we’re at the bottom. Just as nice a little stair for that
slinking Gollum as we could leave. Better put up a signpost to say
which way we’ve gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.’
‘If you can think of any way we could have both used the rope
and yet brought it down with us, then you can pass on to me ninnyhammer, or any other name your gaffer gave you,’ said Frodo. ‘Climb
up and untie it and let yourself down, if you want to!’
Sam scratched his head. ‘No, I can’t think how, begging your
pardon,’ he said. ‘But I don’t like leaving it, and that’s a fact.’ He
stroked the rope’s end and shook it gently. ‘It goes hard parting with
anything I brought out of the Elf-country. Made by Galadriel herself,
too, maybe. Galadriel,’ he murmured, nodding his head mournfully.
He looked up and gave one last pull to the rope as if in farewell.
To the complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam
fell over, and the long grey coils slithered silently down on top of him.
Frodo laughed. ‘Who tied the rope?’ he said. ‘A good thing it held as
long as it did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!’
Sam did not laugh. ‘I may not be much good at climbing, Mr.
Frodo,’ he said in injured tones, ‘but I do know something about
rope and about knots. It’s in the family, as you might say. Why, my
grand-dad, and my uncle Andy after him, him that was the Gaffer’s
eldest brother, he had a rope-walk over by Tighﬁeld many a year.
And I put as fast a hitch over the stump as anyone could have done,
in the Shire or out of it.’
‘Then the rope must have broken – frayed on the rock-edge, I
expect,’ said Frodo.
‘I bet it didn’t!’ said Sam in an even more injured voice. He
stooped and examined the ends. ‘Nor it hasn’t neither. Not a strand!’
‘Then I’m afraid it must have been the knot,’ said Frodo.
Sam shook his head and did not answer. He was passing the rope
through his ﬁngers thoughtfully. ‘Have it your own way, Mr. Frodo,’
he said at last, ‘but I think the rope came off itself – when I called.’
He coiled it up and stowed it lovingly in his pack.
‘It certainly came,’ said Frodo, ‘and that’s the chief thing. But
now we’ve got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon.
How beautiful the stars are, and the Moon!’
‘They do cheer the heart, don’t they?’ said Sam looking up. ‘Elvish
they are, somehow. And the Moon’s growing. We haven’t seen him
for a night or two in this cloudy weather. He’s beginning to give
quite a light.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo; ‘but he won’t be full for some days. I don’t
think we’ll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.’
*
*
*

612

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Under the ﬁrst shadows of night they started out on the next stage
of their journey. After a while Sam turned and looked back at the
way they had come. The mouth of the gully was a black notch in the
dim cliff. ‘I’m glad we’ve got the rope,’ he said. ‘We’ve set a little
puzzle for that footpad, anyhow. He can try his nasty ﬂappy feet on
those ledges!’
They picked their steps away from the skirts of the cliff, among a
wilderness of boulders and rough stones, wet and slippery with the
heavy rain. The ground still fell away sharply. They had not gone
very far when they came upon a great ﬁssure that yawned suddenly
black before their feet. It was not wide, but it was too wide to jump
across in the dim light. They thought they could hear water gurgling
in its depths. It curved away on their left northward, back towards
the hills, and so barred their road in that direction, at any rate while
darkness lasted.
‘We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the
cliff, I think,’ said Sam. ‘We might ﬁnd some nook there, or even a
cave or something.’
‘I suppose so,’ said Frodo. ‘I’m tired, and I don’t think I can
scramble among stones much longer tonight – though I grudge the
delay. I wish there was a clear path in front of us: then I’d go on till
my legs gave way.’
They did not ﬁnd the going any easier at the broken feet of the
Emyn Muil. Nor did Sam ﬁnd any nook or hollow to shelter in: only
bare stony slopes frowned over by the cliff, which now rose again,
higher and more sheer as they went back. In the end, worn out, they
just cast themselves on the ground under the lee of a boulder lying
not far from the foot of the precipice. There for some time they sat
huddled mournfully together in the cold stony night, while sleep crept
upon them in spite of all they could do to hold it off. The moon now
rode high and clear. Its thin white light lit up the faces of the rocks
and drenched the cold frowning walls of the cliff, turning all the wide
looming darkness into a chill pale grey scored with black shadows.
‘Well!’ said Frodo, standing up and drawing his cloak more closely
round him. ‘You sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket. I’ll walk
up and down on sentry for a while.’ Suddenly he stiffened, and
stooping he gripped Sam by the arm. ‘What’s that?’ he whispered.
‘Look over there on the cliff !’
Sam looked and breathed in sharply through his teeth. ‘Ssss!’ he
said. ‘That’s what it is. It’s that Gollum! Snakes and adders! And to
think that I thought that we’d puzzle him with our bit of a climb!
Look at him! Like a nasty crawling spider on a wall.’
*
*
*

´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME

613

Down the face of a precipice, sheer and almost smooth it seemed
in the pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thin
limbs splayed out. Maybe its soft clinging hands and toes were ﬁnding
crevices and holds that no hobbit could ever have seen or used, but
it looked as if it was just creeping down on sticky pads, like some
large prowling thing of insect-kind. And it was coming down head
ﬁrst, as if it was smelling its way. Now and again it lifted its head
slowly, turning it right back on its long skinny neck, and the hobbits
caught a glimpse of two small pale gleaming lights, its eyes that
blinked at the moon for a moment and then were quickly lidded
again.
‘Do you think he can see us?’ said Sam.
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo quietly, ‘but I think not. It is hard even
for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot see you in the
shadow even at a few paces. And I’ve heard that he doesn’t like Sun
or Moon.’
‘Then why is he coming down just here?’ asked Sam.
‘Quietly, Sam!’ said Frodo. ‘He can smell us, perhaps. And he
can hear as keen as Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something
now: our voices probably. We did a lot of shouting away back there;
and we were talking far too loudly until a minute ago.’
‘Well, I’m sick of him,’ said Sam. ‘He’s come once too often for
me, and I’m going to have a word with him, if I can. I don’t suppose
we could give him the slip now anyway.’ Drawing his grey hood well
over his face, Sam crept stealthily towards the cliff.
‘Careful!’ whispered Frodo coming behind. ‘Don’t alarm him!
He’s much more dangerous than he looks.’
The black crawling shape was now three-quarters of the way down,
and perhaps ﬁfty feet or less above the cliff ’s foot. Crouching stonestill in the shadow of a large boulder the hobbits watched him. He
seemed to have come to a difﬁcult passage or to be troubled about
something. They could hear him snufﬂing, and now and again there
was a harsh hiss of breath that sounded like a curse. He lifted his
head, and they thought they heard him spit. Then he moved on
again. Now they could hear his voice creaking and whistling.
‘Ach, sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste less speed. We
musstn’t rissk our neck, musst we, precious? No, precious – gollum!’
He lifted his head again, blinked at the moon, and quickly shut his
eyes. ‘We hate it,’ he hissed. ‘Nassty, nassty shivery light it is – sss
– it spies on us, precious – it hurts our eyes.’
He was getting lower now and the hisses became sharper and
clearer. ‘Where iss it, where iss it: my Precious, my Precious? It’s ours,
it is, and we wants it. The thieves, the thieves, the ﬁlthy little thieves.
Where are they with my Precious? Curse them! We hates them.’

614

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘It doesn’t sound as if he knew we were here, does it?’ whispered
Sam. ‘And what’s his Precious? Does he mean the——’
‘Hsh!’ breathed Frodo. ‘He’s getting near now, near enough to
hear a whisper.’
Indeed Gollum had suddenly paused again, and his large head on
its scrawny neck was lolling from side to side as if he was listening.
His pale eyes were half unlidded. Sam restrained himself, though his
ﬁngers were twitching. His eyes, ﬁlled with anger and disgust, were
ﬁxed on the wretched creature as he now began to move again, still
whispering and hissing to himself.
At last he was no more than a dozen feet from the ground, right
above their heads. From that point there was a sheer drop, for the
cliff was slightly undercut, and even Gollum could not ﬁnd a hold
of any kind. He seemed to be trying to twist round, so as to go legs
ﬁrst, when suddenly with a shrill whistling shriek he fell. As he did
so, he curled his legs and arms up round him, like a spider whose
descending thread is snapped.
Sam was out of his hiding in a ﬂash and crossed the space between
him and the cliff-foot in a couple of leaps. Before Gollum could get
up, he was on top of him. But he found Gollum more than he
bargained for, even taken like that, suddenly, off his guard after a
fall. Before Sam could get a hold, long legs and arms were wound
round him pinning his arms, and a clinging grip, soft but horribly
strong, was squeezing him like slowly tightening cords; clammy
ﬁngers were feeling for his throat. Then sharp teeth bit into his shoulder. All he could do was to butt his hard round head sideways into
the creature’s face. Gollum hissed and spat, but he did not let go.
Things would have gone ill with Sam, if he had been alone. But
Frodo sprang up, and drew Sting from its sheath. With his left hand
he drew back Gollum’s head by his thin lank hair, stretching his long
neck, and forcing his pale venomous eyes to stare up at the sky.
‘Let go! Gollum,’ he said. ‘This is Sting. You have seen it before
once upon a time. Let go, or you’ll feel it this time! I’ll cut your throat.’
Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string. Sam got up,
ﬁngering his shoulder. His eyes smouldered with anger, but he could
not avenge himself: his miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones
whimpering.
‘Don’t hurt us! Don’t let them hurt us, precious! They won’t hurt
us will they, nice little hobbitses? We didn’t mean no harm, but they
jumps on us like cats on poor mices, they did, precious. And we’re
so lonely, gollum. We’ll be nice to them, very nice, if they’ll be nice
to us, won’t we, yes, yess.’
‘Well, what’s to be done with it?’ said Sam. ‘Tie it up, so as it
can’t come sneaking after us no more, I say.’

´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME

615

‘But that would kill us, kill us,’ whimpered Gollum. ‘Cruel little
hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands and leave us, gollum,
gollum.’ Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat.
‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘If we kill him, we must kill him outright. But
we can’t do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no
harm.’
‘Oh hasn’t he!’ said Sam rubbing his shoulder. ‘Anyway he meant
to, and he means to, I’ll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, that’s his
plan.’
‘I daresay,’ said Frodo. ‘But what he means to do is another
matter.’ He paused for a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but
stopped whimpering. Sam stood glowering over him.
It seemed to Frodo then that he heard, quite plainly but far off,
voices out of the past:
What a pity Bilbo did not stab the vile creature, when he had a chance!
Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike
without need.
I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death.
Deserves death! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And
some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too
eager to deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety.
Even the wise cannot see all ends.
‘Very well,’ he answered aloud, lowering his sword. ‘But still I am
afraid. And yet, as you see, I will not touch the creature. For now
that I see him, I do pity him.’
Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one
who was not there. Gollum lifted his head.
‘Yess, wretched we are, precious,’ he whined. ‘Misery misery!
Hobbits won’t kill us, nice hobbits.’
‘No, we won’t,’ said Frodo. ‘But we won’t let you go, either.
You’re full of wickedness and mischief, Gollum. You will have to
come with us, that’s all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must
help us, if you can. One good turn deserves another.’
‘Yess, yes indeed,’ said Gollum sitting up. ‘Nice hobbits! We will
come with them. Find them safe paths in the dark, yes we will. And
where are they going in these cold hard lands, we wonders, yes we
wonders?’ He looked up at them, and a faint light of cunning and
eagerness ﬂickered for a second in his pale blinking eyes.
Sam scowled at him, and sucked his teeth; but he seemed to sense
that there was something odd about his master’s mood and that the
matter was beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo’s
reply.
Frodo looked straight into Gollum’s eyes which ﬂinched and

616

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

twisted away. ‘You know that, or you guess well enough, Sméagol,’
he said, quietly and sternly. ‘We are going to Mordor, of course. And
you know the way there, I believe.’
‘Ach! sss!’ said Gollum, covering his ears with his hands, as if
such frankness, and the open speaking of the names, hurt him. ‘We
guessed, yes we guessed,’ he whispered; ‘and we didn’t want them
to go, did we? No, precious, not the nice hobbits. Ashes, ashes, and
dust, and thirst there is; and pits, pits, pits, and Orcs, thousands of
Orcses. Nice hobbits mustn’t go to – sss – those places.’
‘So you have been there?’ Frodo insisted. ‘And you’re being drawn
back there, aren’t you?’
‘Yess. Yess. No!’ shrieked Gollum. ‘Once, by accident it was,
wasn’t it, precious? Yes, by accident. But we won’t go back, no, no!’
Then suddenly his voice and language changed, and he sobbed in
his throat, and spoke but not to them. ‘Leave me alone, gollum! You
hurt me. O my poor hands, gollum! I, we, I don’t want to come back.
I can’t ﬁnd it. I am tired. I, we can’t ﬁnd it, gollum, gollum, no,
nowhere. They’re always awake. Dwarves, Men, and Elves, terrible
Elves with bright eyes. I can’t ﬁnd it. Ach!’ He got up and clenched
his long hand into a bony ﬂeshless knot, shaking it towards the East.
‘We won’t!’ he cried. ‘Not for you.’ Then he collapsed again. ‘Gollum,
gollum,’ he whimpered with his face to the ground. ‘Don’t look at
us! Go away! Go to sleep!’
‘He will not go away or go to sleep at your command, Sméagol,’
said Frodo. ‘But if you really wish to be free of him again, then
you must help me. And that I fear means ﬁnding us a path towards
him. But you need not go all the way, not beyond the gates of his
land.’
Gollum sat up again and looked at him under his eyelids. ‘He’s
over there,’ he cackled. ‘Always there. Orcs will take you all the way.
Easy to ﬁnd Orcs east of the River. Don’t ask Sméagol. Poor, poor
Sméagol, he went away long ago. They took his Precious, and he’s
lost now.’
‘Perhaps we’ll ﬁnd him again, if you come with us,’ said Frodo.
‘No, no, never! He’s lost his Precious,’ said Gollum.
‘Get up!’ said Frodo.
Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff.
‘Now!’ said Frodo. ‘Can you ﬁnd a path easier by day or by night?
We’re tired; but if you choose the night, we’ll start tonight.’
‘The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,’ Gollum whined. ‘Not under
the White Face, not yet. It will go behind the hills soon, yess. Rest
a bit ﬁrst, nice hobbits!’
‘Then sit down,’ said Frodo, ‘and don’t move!’
*
*
*

´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME

617

The hobbits seated themselves beside him, one on either side, with
their backs to the stony wall, resting their legs. There was no need
for any arrangement by word: they knew that they must not sleep
for a moment. Slowly the moon went by. Shadows fell down from
the hills, and all grew dark before them. The stars grew thick and
bright in the sky above. No one stirred. Gollum sat with his legs drawn
up, knees under chin, ﬂat hands and feet splayed on the ground, his
eyes closed; but he seemed tense, as if thinking or listening.
Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and they understood.
They relaxed, leaning their heads back, and shutting their eyes or
seeming to. Soon the sound of their soft breathing could be heard.
Gollum’s hands twitched a little. Hardly perceptibly his head moved
to the left and the right, and ﬁrst one eye and then the other opened
a slit. The hobbits made no sign.
Suddenly, with startling agility and speed, straight off the ground
with a jump like a grasshopper or a frog, Gollum bounded forward
into the darkness. But that was just what Frodo and Sam had
expected. Sam was on him before he had gone two paces after his
spring. Frodo coming behind grabbed his leg and threw him.
‘Your rope might prove useful again, Sam,’ he said.
Sam got out the rope. ‘And where were you off to in the cold hard
lands, Mr. Gollum?’ he growled. ‘We wonders, aye, we wonders. To
ﬁnd some of your orc-friends, I warrant. You nasty treacherous creature. It’s round your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.’
Gollum lay quiet and tried no further tricks. He did not answer
Sam, but gave him a swift venomous look.
‘All we need is something to keep a hold on him,’ said Frodo.
‘We want him to walk, so it’s no good tying his legs – or his arms,
he seems to use them nearly as much. Tie one end to his ankle, and
keep a grip on the other end.’
He stood over Gollum, while Sam tied the knot. The result surprised them both. Gollum began to scream, a thin, tearing sound,
very horrible to hear. He writhed, and tried to get his mouth to his
ankle and bite the rope. He kept on screaming.
At last Frodo was convinced that he really was in pain; but it could
not be from the knot. He examined it and found that it was not too
tight, indeed hardly tight enough. Sam was gentler than his words.
‘What’s the matter with you?’ he said. ‘If you will try to run away,
you must be tied; but we don’t wish to hurt you.’
‘It hurts us, it hurts us,’ hissed Gollum. ‘It freezes, it bites! Elves
twisted it, curse them! Nasty cruel hobbits! That’s why we tries to
escape, of course it is, precious. We guessed they were cruel hobbits.
They visits Elves, ﬁerce Elves with bright eyes. Take it off us! It hurts
us.’

618

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘No, I will not take it off you,’ said Frodo, ‘not unless’ – he paused
a moment in thought – ‘not unless there is any promise you can make
that I can trust.’
‘We will swear to do what he wants, yes, yess,’ said Gollum, still
twisting and grabbling at his ankle. ‘It hurts us.’
‘Swear?’ said Frodo.
‘Sméagol,’ said Gollum suddenly and clearly, opening his eyes
wide and staring at Frodo with a strange light. ‘Sméagol will swear
on the Precious.’
Frodo drew himself up, and again Sam was startled by his words
and his stern voice. ‘On the Precious? How dare you?’ he said. ‘Think!
One Ring to rule them all and in the Darkness bind them.
Would you commit your promise to that, Sméagol? It will hold you.
But it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words.
Beware!’
Gollum cowered. ‘On the Precious, on the Precious!’ he repeated.
‘And what would you swear?’ asked Frodo.
‘To be very very good,’ said Gollum. Then crawling to Frodo’s
feet he grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran over
him, as if the words shook his very bones with fear. ‘Sméagol will
swear never, never, to let Him have it. Never! Sméagol will save it.
But he must swear on the Precious.’
‘No! not on it,’ said Frodo, looking down at him with stern pity.
‘All you wish is to see it and touch it, if you can, though you know
it would drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it, if you will. For you
know where it is. Yes, you know, Sméagol. It is before you.’
For a moment it appeared to Sam that his master had grown and
Gollum had shrunk: a tall stern shadow, a mighty lord who hid his
brightness in grey cloud, and at his feet a little whining dog. Yet the
two were in some way akin and not alien: they could reach one
another’s minds. Gollum raised himself and began pawing at Frodo,
fawning at his knees.
‘Down! down!’ said Frodo. ‘Now speak your promise!’
‘We promises, yes I promise!’ said Gollum. ‘I will serve the master
of the Precious. Good master, good Sméagol, gollum, gollum!’ Suddenly he began to weep and bite at his ankle again.
‘Take the rope off, Sam!’ said Frodo.
Reluctantly Sam obeyed. At once Gollum got up and began prancing about, like a whipped cur whose master has patted it. From that
moment a change, which lasted for some time, came over him. He
spoke with less hissing and whining, and he spoke to his companions
direct, not to his precious self. He would cringe and ﬂinch, if they

´ AGOL
THE TAMING OF SME

619

stepped near him or made any sudden movement, and he avoided the
touch of their elven-cloaks; but he was friendly, and indeed pitifully
anxious to please. He would cackle with laughter and caper, if any
jest was made, or even if Frodo spoke kindly to him, and weep if
Frodo rebuked him. Sam said little to him of any sort. He suspected
him more deeply than ever, and if possible liked the new Gollum,
the Sméagol, less than the old.
‘Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we’re to call you,’ he said, ‘now
for it! The Moon’s gone, and the night’s going. We’d better start.’
‘Yes, yes,’ agreed Gollum, skipping about. ‘Off we go! There’s
only one way across between the North-end and the South-end. I
found it, I did. Orcs don’t use it, Orcs don’t know it. Orcs don’t
cross the Marshes, they go round for miles and miles. Very lucky you
came this way. Very lucky you found Sméagol, yes. Follow Sméagol!’
He took a few steps away and looked back inquiringly, like a dog
inviting them for a walk. ‘Wait a bit, Gollum!’ cried Sam. ‘Not too
far ahead now! I’m going to be at your tail, and I’ve got the rope
handy.’
‘No, no!’ said Gollum. ‘Sméagol promised.’
In the deep of night under hard clear stars they set off. Gollum
led them back northward for a while along the way they had come;
then he slanted to the right away from the steep edge of the Emyn
Muil, down the broken stony slopes towards the vast fens below.
They faded swiftly and softly into the darkness. Over all the leagues
of waste before the gates of Mordor there was a black silence.

Chapter 2
THE PASSAGE OF
THE MARSHES
Gollum moved quickly, with his head and neck thrust forward, often
using his hands as well as his feet. Frodo and Sam were hard put to
it to keep up with him; but he seemed no longer to have any thought
of escaping, and if they fell behind, he would turn and wait for them.
After a time he brought them to the brink of the narrow gully that
they had struck before; but they were now further from the hills.
‘Here it is!’ he cried. ‘There is a way down inside, yes. Now we
follows it – out, out away over there.’ He pointed south and east
towards the marshes. The reek of them came to their nostrils, heavy
and foul even in the cool night air.
Gollum cast up and down along the brink, and at length he called
to them. ‘Here! We can get down here. Sméagol went this way once:
I went this way, hiding from Orcs.’
He led the way, and following him the hobbits climbed down into
the gloom. It was not difﬁcult, for the rift was at this point only some
ﬁfteen feet deep and about a dozen across. There was running water
at the bottom: it was in fact the bed of one of the many small rivers
that trickled down from the hills to feed the stagnant pools and mires
beyond. Gollum turned to the right, southward more or less, and
splashed along with his feet in the shallow stony stream. He seemed
greatly delighted to feel the water, and chuckled to himself, sometimes
even croaking in a sort of song.
The cold hard lands
they bites our hands,
they gnaws our feet.
The rocks and stones
are like old bones
all bare of meat.
But stream and pool
is wet and cool:
so nice for feet!
And now we wish——
‘Ha! ha! What does we wish?’ he said, looking sidelong at the
hobbits. ‘We’ll tell you,’ he croaked. ‘He guessed it long ago, Baggins

THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES

621

guessed it.’ A glint came into his eyes, and Sam catching the gleam
in the darkness thought it far from pleasant.
Alive without breath;
as cold as death;
never thirsting, ever drinking;
clad in mail, never clinking.
Drowns on dry land,
thinks an island
is a mountain;
thinks a fountain
is a puff of air.
So sleek, so fair!
What a joy to meet!
We only wish
to catch a ﬁsh,
so juicy-sweet!
These words only made more pressing to Sam’s mind a problem
that had been troubling him from the moment when he understood
that his master was going to adopt Gollum as a guide: the problem
of food. It did not occur to him that his master might also have
thought of it, but he supposed Gollum had. Indeed how had Gollum
kept himself in all his lonely wandering? ‘Not too well,’ thought Sam.
‘He looks fair famished. Not too dainty to try what hobbit tastes like,
if there ain’t no ﬁsh, I’ll wager – supposing as he could catch us
napping. Well, he won’t: not Sam Gamgee for one.’
They stumbled along in the dark winding gully for a long time,
or so it seemed to the tired feet of Frodo and Sam. The gully turned
eastward, and as they went on it broadened and got gradually shallower. At last the sky above grew faint with the ﬁrst grey of morning.
Gollum had shown no signs of tiring, but now he looked up and
halted.
‘Day is near,’ he whispered, as if Day was something that might
overhear him and spring on him. ‘Sméagol will stay here: I will stay
here, and the Yellow Face won’t see me.’
‘We should be glad to see the Sun,’ said Frodo, ‘but we will stay
here: we are too tired to go any further at present.’
‘You are not wise to be glad of the Yellow Face,’ said Gollum. ‘It
shows you up. Nice sensible hobbits stay with Sméagol. Orcs and
nasty things are about. They can see a long way. Stay and hide with
me!’
The three of them settled down to rest at the foot of the rocky

622

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

wall of the gully. It was not much more than a tall man’s height now,
and at its base there were wide ﬂat shelves of dry stone; the water
ran in a channel on the other side. Frodo and Sam sat on one of the
ﬂats, resting their backs. Gollum paddled and scrabbled in the stream.
‘We must take a little food,’ said Frodo. ‘Are you hungry, Sméagol?
We have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.’
At the word hungry a greenish light was kindled in Gollum’s pale
eyes, and they seemed to protrude further than ever from his thin
sickly face. For a moment he relapsed into his old Gollum-manner.
‘We are famisshed, yes famisshed we are, precious,’ he said. ‘What
is it they eats? Have they nice ﬁsshes?’ His tongue lolled out between
his sharp yellow teeth, licking his colourless lips.
‘No, we have got no ﬁsh,’ said Frodo. ‘We have only got this’ –
he held up a wafer of lembas – ‘and water, if the water here is ﬁt to
drink.’
‘Yess, yess, nice water,’ said Gollum. ‘Drink it, drink it, while we
can! But what is it they’ve got, precious? Is it crunchable? Is it tasty?’
Frodo broke off a portion of a wafer and handed it to him on its
leaf-wrapping. Gollum sniffed at the leaf and his face changed: a
spasm of disgust came over it, and a hint of his old malice. ‘Sméagol
smells it!’ he said. ‘Leaves out of the Elf-country, gah! They stinks.
He climbed in those trees, and he couldn’t wash the smell off his
hands, my nice hands.’ Dropping the leaf, he took a corner of the
lembas and nibbled it. He spat, and a ﬁt of coughing shook him.
‘Ach! No!’ he spluttered. ‘You try to choke poor Sméagol. Dust
and ashes, he can’t eat that. He must starve. But Sméagol doesn’t
mind. Nice hobbits! Sméagol has promised. He will starve. He can’t
eat hobbits’ food. He will starve. Poor thin Sméagol!’
‘I’m sorry,’ said Frodo; ‘but I can’t help you, I’m afraid. I think
this food would do you good, if you would try. But perhaps you can’t
even try, not yet anyway.’
The hobbits munched their lembas in silence. Sam thought that it
tasted far better, somehow, than it had for a good while: Gollum’s
behaviour had made him attend to its ﬂavour again. But he did not
feel comfortable. Gollum watched every morsel from hand to mouth,
like an expectant dog by a diner’s chair. Only when they had ﬁnished
and were preparing to rest, was he apparently convinced that they
had no hidden dainties that he could share in. Then he went and sat
by himself a few paces away and whimpered a little.
‘Look here!’ Sam whispered to Frodo, not too softly: he did not
really care whether Gollum heard him or not. ‘We’ve got to get some
sleep; but not both together with that hungry villain nigh, promise
or no promise. Sméagol or Gollum, he won’t change his habits in a

THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES

623

hurry, I’ll warrant. You go to sleep, Mr. Frodo, and I’ll call you when
I can’t keep my eyelids propped up. Turn and about, same as before,
while he’s loose.’
‘Perhaps you’re right, Sam,’ said Frodo speaking openly. ‘There
is a change in him, but just what kind of a change and how deep,
I’m not sure yet. Seriously though, I don’t think there is any need
for fear – at present. Still watch if you wish. Give me about two
hours, not more, and then call me.’
So tired was Frodo that his head fell forward on his breast and he
slept, almost as soon as he had spoken the words. Gollum seemed
no longer to have any fears. He curled up and went quickly to sleep,
quite unconcerned. Presently his breath was hissing softly through
his clenched teeth, but he lay still as stone. After a while, fearing that
he would drop off himself, if he sat listening to his two companions
breathing, Sam got up and gently prodded Gollum. His hands
uncurled and twitched, but he made no other movement. Sam bent
down and said ﬁssh close to his ear, but there was no response, not
even a catch in Gollum’s breathing.
Sam scratched his head. ‘Must really be asleep,’ he muttered. ‘And
if I was like Gollum, he wouldn’t wake up never again.’ He restrained
the thoughts of his sword and the rope that sprang to his mind, and
went and sat down by his master.
When he woke up the sky above was dim, not lighter but darker
than when they had breakfasted. Sam leapt to his feet. Not least from
his own feeling of vigour and hunger, he suddenly understood that
he had slept the daylight away, nine hours at least. Frodo was still
fast asleep, lying now stretched on his side. Gollum was not to be
seen. Various reproachful names for himself came to Sam’s mind,
drawn from the Gaffer’s large paternal word-hoard; then it also
occurred to him that his master had been right: there had for the
present been nothing to guard against. They were at any rate both
alive and unthrottled.
‘Poor wretch!’ he said half remorsefully. ‘Now I wonder where
he’s got to?’
‘Not far, not far!’ said a voice above him. He looked up and saw
the shape of Gollum’s large head and ears against the evening sky.
‘Here, what are you doing?’ cried Sam, his suspicions coming back
as soon as he saw that shape.
‘Sméagol is hungry,’ said Gollum. ‘Be back soon.’
‘Come back now!’ shouted Sam. ‘Hi! Come back!’ But Gollum
had vanished.
Frodo woke at the sound of Sam’s shout and sat up, rubbing his
eyes. ‘Hullo!’ he said. ‘Anything wrong? What’s the time?’

624

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I dunno,’ said Sam. ‘After sundown, I reckon. And he’s gone off.
Says he’s hungry.’
‘Don’t worry!’ said Frodo. ‘There’s no help for it. But he’ll come
back, you’ll see. The promise will hold yet a while. And he won’t
leave his Precious, anyway.’
Frodo made light of it when he learned that they had slept soundly
for hours with Gollum, and a very hungry Gollum too, loose beside
them. ‘Don’t think of any of your gaffer’s hard names,’ he said. ‘You
were worn out, and it has turned out well: we are now both rested.
And we have a hard road ahead, the worst road of all.’
‘About the food,’ said Sam. ‘How long’s it going to take us to do
this job? And when it’s done, what are we going to do then? This
waybread keeps you on your legs in a wonderful way, though it
doesn’t satisfy the innards proper, as you might say: not to my feeling
anyhow, meaning no disrespect to them as made it. But you have to
eat some of it every day, and it doesn’t grow. I reckon we’ve got
enough to last, say, three weeks or so, and that with a tight belt and
a light tooth, mind you. We’ve been a bit free with it so far.’
‘I don’t know how long we shall take to – to ﬁnish,’ said Frodo. ‘We
were miserably delayed in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee, my dear
hobbit – indeed, Sam my dearest hobbit, friend of friends – I do not
think we need give thought to what comes after that. To do the job
as you put it – what hope is there that we ever shall? And if we do,
who knows what will come of that? If the One goes into the Fire,
and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are we ever likely to need bread
again? I think not. If we can nurse our limbs to bring us to Mount
Doom, that is all we can do. More than I can, I begin to feel.’
Sam nodded silently. He took his master’s hand and bent over it. He
did not kiss it, though his tears fell on it. Then he turned away, drew his
sleeve over his nose, and got up, and stamped about, trying to whistle,
and saying between the efforts: ‘Where’s that dratted creature?’
It was actually not long before Gollum returned; but he came so
quietly that they did not hear him till he stood before them. His
ﬁngers and face were soiled with black mud. He was still chewing
and slavering. What he was chewing, they did not ask or like to think.
‘Worms or beetles or something slimy out of holes,’ thought Sam.
‘Brr! The nasty creature; the poor wretch!’
Gollum said nothing to them, until he had drunk deeply and
washed himself in the stream. Then he came up to them, licking his
lips. ‘Better now,’ he said. ‘Are we rested? Ready to go on? Nice
hobbits, they sleep beautifully. Trust Sméagol now? Very, very good.’
The next stage of their journey was much the same as the last. As
they went on the gully became ever shallower and the slope of its

THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES

625

ﬂoor more gradual. Its bottom was less stony and more earthy, and
slowly its sides dwindled to mere banks. It began to wind and wander.
That night drew to its end, but clouds were now over moon and star,
and they knew of the coming of day only by the slow spreading of
the thin grey light.
In a chill hour they came to the end of the water-course. The
banks became moss-grown mounds. Over the last shelf of rotting
stone the stream gurgled and fell down into a brown bog and was
lost. Dry reeds hissed and rattled though they could feel no wind.
On either side and in front wide fens and mires now lay, stretching
away southward and eastward into the dim half-light. Mists curled
and smoked from dark and noisome pools. The reek of them hung
stiﬂing in the still air. Far away, now almost due south, the mountainwalls of Mordor loomed, like a black bar of rugged clouds ﬂoating
above a dangerous fog-bound sea.
The hobbits were now wholly in the hands of Gollum. They did
not know, and could not guess in that misty light, that they were in
fact only just within the northern borders of the marshes, the main
expanse of which lay south of them. They could, if they had known
the lands, with some delay have retraced their steps a little, and then
turning east have come round over hard roads to the bare plain of
Dagorlad: the ﬁeld of the ancient battle before the gates of Mordor.
Not that there was great hope in such a course. On that stony plain
there was no cover, and across it ran the highways of the Orcs and
the soldiers of the Enemy. Not even the cloaks of Lórien would have
concealed them there.
‘How do we shape our course now, Sméagol?’ asked Frodo. ‘Must
we cross these evil-smelling fens?’
‘No need, no need at all,’ said Gollum. ‘Not if hobbits want to
reach the dark mountains and go to see Him very quick. Back a little,
and round a little’ – his skinny arm waved north and east – ‘and you
can come on hard cold roads to the very gates of His country. Lots
of His people will be there looking out for guests, very pleased to
take them straight to Him, O yes. His Eye watches that way all the
time. It caught Sméagol there, long ago.’ Gollum shuddered. ‘But
Sméagol has used his eyes since then, yes, yes: I’ve used eyes and
feet and nose since then. I know other ways. More difﬁcult, not so
quick; but better, if we don’t want Him to see. Follow Sméagol! He
can take you through the marshes, through the mists, nice thick mists.
Follow Sméagol very carefully, and you may go a long way, quite a
long way, before He catches you, yes perhaps.’
*
*
*

626

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

It was already day, a windless and sullen morning, and the marshreeks lay in heavy banks. No sun pierced the low clouded sky, and
Gollum seemed anxious to continue the journey at once. So after a
brief rest they set out again and were soon lost in a shadowy silent
world, cut off from all view of the lands about, either the hills that
they had left or the mountains that they sought. They went slowly
in single ﬁle: Gollum, Sam, Frodo.
Frodo seemed the most weary of the three, and slow though they
went, he often lagged. The hobbits soon found that what had looked
like one vast fen was really an endless network of pools, and soft mires,
and winding half-strangled water-courses. Among these a cunning eye
and foot could thread a wandering path. Gollum certainly had that
cunning, and needed all of it. His head on its long neck was ever
turning this way and that, while he sniffed and muttered all the
time to himself. Sometimes he would hold up his hand and halt
them, while he went forward a little, crouching, testing the ground
with ﬁngers or toes, or merely listening with one ear pressed to the
earth.
It was dreary and wearisome. Cold clammy winter still held sway
in this forsaken country. The only green was the scum of livid weed
on the dark greasy surfaces of the sullen waters. Dead grasses and
rotting reeds loomed up in the mists like ragged shadows of longforgotten summers.
As the day wore on the light increased a little, and the mists lifted,
growing thinner and more transparent. Far above the rot and vapours
of the world the Sun was riding high and golden now in a serene
country with ﬂoors of dazzling foam, but only a passing ghost of her
could they see below, bleared, pale, giving no colour and no warmth.
But even at this faint reminder of her presence Gollum scowled and
ﬂinched. He halted their journey, and they rested, squatting like little
hunted animals, in the borders of a great brown reed-thicket. There
was a deep silence, only scraped on its surfaces by the faint quiver
of empty seed-plumes, and broken grass-blades trembling in small
air-movements that they could not feel.
‘Not a bird!’ said Sam mournfully.
‘No, no birds,’ said Gollum. ‘Nice birds!’ He licked his teeth. ‘No
birds here. There are snakeses, wormses, things in the pools. Lots of
things, lots of nasty things. No birds,’ he ended sadly. Sam looked
at him with distaste.
So passed the third day of their journey with Gollum. Before the
shadows of evening were long in happier lands, they went on again,
always on and on with only brief halts. These they made not so much
for rest as to help Gollum; for now even he had to go forward with

THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES

627

great care, and he was sometimes at a loss for a while. They had
come to the very midst of the Dead Marshes, and it was dark.
They walked slowly, stooping, keeping close in line, following
attentively every move that Gollum made. The fens grew more wet,
opening into wide stagnant meres, among which it grew more and
more difﬁcult to ﬁnd the ﬁrmer places where feet could tread without
sinking into gurgling mud. The travellers were light, or maybe none
of them would ever have found a way through.
Presently it grew altogether dark: the air itself seemed black and
heavy to breathe. When lights appeared Sam rubbed his eyes: he
thought his head was going queer. He ﬁrst saw one with the corner
of his left eye, a wisp of pale sheen that faded away; but others
appeared soon after: some like dimly shining smoke, some like misty
ﬂames ﬂickering slowly above unseen candles; here and there they
twisted like ghostly sheets unfurled by hidden hands. But neither of
his companions spoke a word.
At last Sam could bear it no longer. ‘What’s all this, Gollum?’ he
said in a whisper. ‘These lights? They’re all round us now. Are we
trapped? Who are they?’
Gollum looked up. A dark water was before him, and he was
crawling on the ground, this way and that, doubtful of the way. ‘Yes,
they are all round us,’ he whispered. ‘The tricksy lights. Candles of
corpses, yes, yes. Don’t you heed them! Don’t look! Don’t follow
them! Where’s the master?’
Sam looked back and found that Frodo had lagged again. He
could not see him. He went some paces back into the darkness, not
daring to move far, or to call in more than a hoarse whisper. Suddenly
he stumbled against Frodo, who was standing lost in thought, looking
at the pale lights. His hands hung stiff at his sides; water and slime
were dripping from them.
‘Come, Mr. Frodo!’ said Sam. ‘Don’t look at them! Gollum says
we mustn’t. Let’s keep up with him and get out of this cursed place
as quick as we can – if we can!’
‘All right,’ said Frodo, as if returning out of a dream. ‘I’m coming.
Go on!’
Hurrying forward again, Sam tripped, catching his foot in some
old root or tussock. He fell and came heavily on his hands, which
sank deep into sticky ooze, so that his face was brought close to the
surface of the dark mere. There was a faint hiss, a noisome smell
went up, the lights ﬂickered and danced and swirled. For a moment
the water below him looked like some window, glazed with grimy
glass, through which he was peering. Wrenching his hands out of the
bog, he sprang back with a cry. ‘There are dead things, dead faces
in the water,’ he said with horror. ‘Dead faces!’

628

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gollum laughed. ‘The Dead Marshes, yes, yes: that is their name,’
he cackled. ‘You should not look in when the candles are lit.’
‘Who are they? What are they?’ asked Sam shuddering, turning to
Frodo, who was now behind him.
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo in a dreamlike voice. ‘But I have seen
them too. In the pools when the candles were lit. They lie in all the
pools, pale faces, deep deep under the dark water. I saw them: grim
faces and evil, and noble faces and sad. Many faces proud and fair,
and weeds in their silver hair. But all foul, all rotting, all dead. A fell
light is in them.’ Frodo hid his eyes in his hands. ‘I know not who
they are; but I thought I saw there Men and Elves, and Orcs beside
them.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Gollum. ‘All dead, all rotten. Elves and Men and
Orcs. The Dead Marshes. There was a great battle long ago, yes, so
they told him when Sméagol was young, when I was young before
the Precious came. It was a great battle. Tall Men with long swords,
and terrible Elves, and Orcses shrieking. They fought on the plain
for days and months at the Black Gates. But the Marshes have grown
since then, swallowed up the graves; always creeping, creeping.’
‘But that is an age and more ago,’ said Sam. ‘The Dead can’t be
really there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land?’
‘Who knows? Sméagol doesn’t know,’ answered Gollum. ‘You
cannot reach them, you cannot touch them. We tried once, yes,
precious. I tried once; but you cannot reach them. Only shapes to
see, perhaps, not to touch. No precious! All dead.’
Sam looked darkly at him and shuddered again, thinking that he
guessed why Sméagol had tried to touch them. ‘Well, I don’t want
to see them,’ he said. ‘Never again! Can’t we get on and get away?’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Gollum. ‘But slowly, very slowly. Very carefully!
Or hobbits go down to join the Dead ones and light little candles.
Follow Sméagol! Don’t look at lights!’
He crawled away to the right, seeking for a path round the mere.
They came close behind, stooping, often using their hands even as
he did. ‘Three precious little Gollums in a row we shall be, if this
goes on much longer,’ thought Sam.
At last they came to the end of the black mere, and they crossed
it, perilously, crawling or hopping from one treacherous island tussock to another. Often they ﬂoundered, stepping or falling hands-ﬁrst
into waters as noisome as a cesspool, till they were slimed and fouled
almost up to their necks and stank in one another’s nostrils.
It was late in the night when at length they reached ﬁrmer ground
again. Gollum hissed and whispered to himself, but it appeared that
he was pleased: in some mysterious way, by some blended sense of

THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES

629

feel, and smell, and uncanny memory for shapes in the dark, he
seemed to know just where he was again, and to be sure of his road
ahead.
‘Now on we go!’ he said. ‘Nice hobbits! Brave hobbits! Very very
weary, of course; so we are, my precious, all of us. But we must take
master away from the wicked lights, yes, yes, we must.’ With these
words he started off again, almost at a trot, down what appeared to
be a long lane between high reeds, and they stumbled after him as
quickly as they could. But in a little while he stopped suddenly and
sniffed the air doubtfully, hissing as if he was troubled or displeased
again.
‘What is it?’ growled Sam, misinterpreting the signs. ‘What’s the
need to sniff ? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held.
You stink, and master stinks; the whole place stinks.’
‘Yes, yes, and Sam stinks!’ answered Gollum. ‘Poor Sméagol
smells it, but good Sméagol bears it. Helps nice master. But that’s
no matter. The air’s moving, change is coming. Sméagol wonders;
he’s not happy.’
He went on again, but his uneasiness grew, and every now and
again he stood up to his full height, craning his neck eastward and
southward. For some time the hobbits could not hear or feel what
was troubling him. Then suddenly all three halted, stiffening and
listening. To Frodo and Sam it seemed that they heard, far away, a
long wailing cry, high and thin and cruel. They shivered. At the same
moment the stirring of the air became perceptible to them; and it
grew very cold. As they stood straining their ears, they heard a noise
like a wind coming in the distance. The misty lights wavered,
dimmed, and went out.
Gollum would not move. He stood shaking and gibbering to himself, until with a rush the wind came upon them, hissing and snarling
over the marshes. The night became less dark, light enough for them
to see, or half see, shapeless drifts of fog, curling and twisting as it
rolled over them and passed them. Looking up they saw the clouds
breaking and shredding; and then high in the south the moon glimmered out, riding in the ﬂying wrack.
For a moment the sight of it gladdened the hearts of the hobbits;
but Gollum cowered down, muttering curses on the White Face.
Then Frodo and Sam staring at the sky, breathing deeply of the
fresher air, saw it come: a small cloud ﬂying from the accursed hills;
a black shadow loosed from Mordor; a vast shape winged and ominous. It scudded across the moon, and with a deadly cry went away
westward, outrunning the wind in its fell speed.
They fell forward, grovelling heedlessly on the cold earth. But the

630

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

shadow of horror wheeled and returned, passing lower now, right
above them, sweeping the fen-reek with its ghastly wings. And then
it was gone, ﬂying back to Mordor with the speed of the wrath of
Sauron; and behind it the wind roared away, leaving the Dead
Marshes bare and bleak. The naked waste, as far as the eye could
pierce, even to the distant menace of the mountains, was dappled
with the ﬁtful moonlight.
Frodo and Sam got up, rubbing their eyes, like children wakened
from an evil dream to ﬁnd the familiar night still over the world. But
Gollum lay on the ground as if he had been stunned. They roused
him with difﬁculty, and for some time he would not lift his face, but
knelt forward on his elbows, covering the back of his head with his
large ﬂat hands.
‘Wraiths!’ he wailed. ‘Wraiths on wings! The Precious is their
master. They see everything, everything. Nothing can hide from
them. Curse the White Face! And they tell Him everything. He sees,
He knows. Ach, gollum, gollum, gollum!’ It was not until the moon
had sunk, westering far away beyond Tol Brandir, that he would get
up or make a move.
From that time on Sam thought that he sensed a change in Gollum
again. He was more fawning and would-be friendly; but Sam surprised some strange looks in his eyes at times, especially towards
Frodo; and he went back more and more into his old manner of
speaking. And Sam had another growing anxiety. Frodo seemed to
be weary, weary to the point of exhaustion. He said nothing, indeed
he hardly spoke at all; and he did not complain, but he walked like
one who carries a load, the weight of which is ever increasing; and
he dragged along, slower and slower, so that Sam had often to beg
Gollum to wait and not to leave their master behind.
In fact with every step towards the gates of Mordor Frodo felt the
Ring on its chain about his neck grow more burdensome. He was
now beginning to feel it as an actual weight dragging him earthwards.
But far more he was troubled by the Eye: so he called it to himself.
It was that more than the drag of the Ring that made him cower and
stoop as he walked. The Eye: that horrible growing sense of a hostile
will that strove with great power to pierce all shadows of cloud, and
earth, and ﬂesh, and to see you: to pin you under its deadly gaze,
naked, immovable. So thin, so frail and thin, the veils were become
that still warded it off. Frodo knew just where the present habitation
and heart of that will now was: as certainly as a man can tell the
direction of the sun with his eyes shut. He was facing it, and its
potency beat upon his brow.
Gollum probably felt something of the same sort. But what went

THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES

631

on in his wretched heart between the pressure of the Eye, and the
lust of the Ring that was so near, and his grovelling promise made
half in the fear of cold iron, the hobbits did not guess. Frodo gave
no thought to it. Sam’s mind was occupied mostly with his master,
hardly noticing the dark cloud that had fallen on his own heart. He
put Frodo in front of him now, and kept a watchful eye on every
movement of his, supporting him if he stumbled, and trying to
encourage him with clumsy words.
When day came at last the hobbits were surprised to see how much
closer the ominous mountains had already drawn. The air was now
clearer and colder, and though still far off, the walls of Mordor were
no longer a cloudy menace on the edge of sight, but as grim black
towers they frowned across a dismal waste. The marshes were at an
end, dying away into dead peats and wide ﬂats of dry cracked mud.
The land ahead rose in long shallow slopes, barren and pitiless,
towards the desert that lay at Sauron’s gate.
While the grey light lasted, they cowered under a black stone like
worms, shrinking, lest the winged terror should pass and spy them
with its cruel eyes. The remainder of that journey was a shadow of
growing fear in which memory could ﬁnd nothing to rest upon. For
two more nights they struggled on through the weary pathless land.
The air, as it seemed to them, grew harsh, and ﬁlled with a bitter
reek that caught their breath and parched their mouths.
At last, on the ﬁfth morning since they took the road with Gollum,
they halted once more. Before them dark in the dawn the great
mountains reached up to roofs of smoke and cloud. Out from their
feet were ﬂung huge buttresses and broken hills that were now at the
nearest scarce a dozen miles away. Frodo looked round in horror.
Dreadful as the Dead Marshes had been, and the arid moors of the
Noman-lands, more loathsome far was the country that the crawling
day now slowly unveiled to his shrinking eyes. Even to the Mere of
Dead Faces some haggard phantom of green spring would come; but
here neither spring nor summer would ever come again. Here nothing
lived, not even the leprous growths that feed on rottenness. The
gasping pools were choked with ash and crawling muds, sickly white
and grey, as if the mountains had vomited the ﬁlth of their entrails
upon the lands about. High mounds of crushed and powdered rock,
great cones of earth ﬁre-blasted and poison-stained, stood like an
obscene graveyard in endless rows, slowly revealed in the reluctant
light.
They had come to the desolation that lay before Mordor: the
lasting monument to the dark labour of its slaves that should endure
when all their purposes were made void; a land deﬁled, diseased

632

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

beyond all healing – unless the Great Sea should enter in and wash
it with oblivion. ‘I feel sick,’ said Sam. Frodo did not speak.
For a while they stood there, like men on the edge of a sleep where
nightmare lurks, holding it off, though they know that they can only
come to morning through the shadows. The light broadened and
hardened. The gasping pits and poisonous mounds grew hideously
clear. The sun was up, walking among clouds and long ﬂags of smoke,
but even the sunlight was deﬁled. The hobbits had no welcome for
that light; unfriendly it seemed, revealing them in their helplessness
– little squeaking ghosts that wandered among the ash-heaps of the
Dark Lord.
Too weary to go further they sought for some place where they
could rest. For a while they sat without speaking under the shadow
of a mound of slag; but foul fumes leaked out of it, catching their
throats and choking them. Gollum was the ﬁrst to get up. Spluttering
and cursing he rose, and without a word or a glance at the hobbits
he crawled away on all fours. Frodo and Sam crawled after him until
they came to a wide almost circular pit, high-banked upon the west.
It was cold and dead, and a foul sump of oily many-coloured ooze
lay at its bottom. In this evil hole they cowered, hoping in its shadow
to escape the attention of the Eye.
The day passed slowly. A great thirst troubled them, but they
drank only a few drops from their bottles – last ﬁlled in the gully,
which now as they looked back in thought seemed to them a place
of peace and beauty. The hobbits took it in turn to watch. At ﬁrst,
tired as they were, neither of them could sleep at all; but as the sun
far away was climbing down into slow moving cloud, Sam dozed. It
was Frodo’s turn to be on guard. He lay back on the slope of the
pit, but that did not ease the sense of burden that was on him. He
looked up at the smoke-streaked sky and saw strange phantoms, dark
riding shapes, and faces out of the past. He lost count of time, hovering between sleep and waking, until forgetfulness came over him.
Suddenly Sam woke up thinking that he heard his master calling.
It was evening. Frodo could not have called, for he had fallen asleep,
and had slid down nearly to the bottom of the pit. Gollum was by
him. For a moment Sam thought that he was trying to rouse Frodo;
then he saw that it was not so. Gollum was talking to himself. Sméagol
was holding a debate with some other thought that used the same
voice but made it squeak and hiss. A pale light and a green light
alternated in his eyes as he spoke.
‘Sméagol promised,’ said the ﬁrst thought.
‘Yes, yes, my precious,’ came the answer, ‘we promised: to save

THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES

633

our Precious, not to let Him have it – never. But it’s going to Him,
yes, nearer every step. What’s the hobbit going to do with it, we
wonders, yes we wonders.’
‘I don’t know. I can’t help it. Master’s got it. Sméagol promised
to help the master.’
‘Yes, yes, to help the master: the master of the Precious. But
if we was master, then we could help ourselfs, yes, and still keep
promises.’
‘But Sméagol said he would be very very good. Nice hobbit! He
took cruel rope off Sméagol’s leg. He speaks nicely to me.’
‘Very very good, eh, my precious? Let’s be good, good as ﬁsh,
sweet one, but to ourselfs. Not hurt the nice hobbit, of course, no,
no.’
‘But the Precious holds the promise,’ the voice of Sméagol
objected.
‘Then take it,’ said the other, ‘and let’s hold it ourselfs! Then we
shall be master, gollum! Make the other hobbit, the nasty suspicious
hobbit, make him crawl, yes, gollum!’
‘But not the nice hobbit?’
‘Oh no, not if it doesn’t please us. Still he’s a Baggins, my precious,
yes, a Baggins. A Baggins stole it. He found it and he said nothing,
nothing. We hates Bagginses.’
‘No, not this Baggins.’
‘Yes, every Baggins. All peoples that keep the Precious. We must
have it!’
‘But He’ll see, He’ll know. He’ll take it from us!’
‘He sees. He knows. He heard us make silly promises – against
His orders, yes. Must take it. The Wraiths are searching. Must take
it.’
‘Not for Him!’
‘No, sweet one. See, my precious: if we has it, then we can escape,
even from Him, eh? Perhaps we grows very strong, stronger than
Wraiths. Lord Sméagol? Gollum the Great? The Gollum! Eat ﬁsh
every day, three times a day, fresh from the sea. Most Precious Gollum! Must have it. We wants it, we wants it, we wants it!’
‘But there’s two of them. They’ll wake too quick and kill us,’
whined Sméagol in a last effort. ‘Not now. Not yet.’
‘We wants it! But’ – and here there was a long pause, as if a new
thought had wakened. ‘Not yet, eh? Perhaps not. She might help.
She might, yes.’
‘No, no! Not that way!’ wailed Sméagol.
‘Yes! We wants it! We wants it!’
Each time that the second thought spoke, Gollum’s long hand
crept out slowly, pawing towards Frodo, and then was drawn back

634

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

with a jerk as Sméagol spoke again. Finally both arms, with long
ﬁngers ﬂexed and twitching, clawed towards his neck.
Sam had lain still, fascinated by this debate, but watching every
move that Gollum made from under his half-closed eye-lids. To his
simple mind ordinary hunger, the desire to eat hobbits, had seemed
the chief danger in Gollum. He realized now that it was not so:
Gollum was feeling the terrible call of the Ring. The Dark Lord was
He, of course; but Sam wondered who She was. One of the nasty
friends the little wretch had made in his wanderings, he supposed.
Then he forgot the point, for things had plainly gone far enough,
and were getting dangerous. A great heaviness was in all his limbs,
but he roused himself with an effort and sat up. Something warned
him to be careful and not to reveal that he had overheard the debate.
He let out a loud sigh and gave a huge yawn.
‘What’s the time?’ he said sleepily.
Gollum sent out a long hiss through his teeth. He stood up for a
moment, tense and menacing; and then he collapsed, falling forward
on to all fours and crawling up the bank of the pit. ‘Nice hobbits!
Nice Sam!’ he said. ‘Sleepy heads, yes, sleepy heads! Leave good
Sméagol to watch! But it’s evening. Dusk is creeping. Time to go.’
‘High time!’ thought Sam. ‘And time we parted, too.’ Yet it crossed
his mind to wonder if indeed Gollum was not now as dangerous
turned loose as kept with them. ‘Curse him! I wish he was choked!’
he muttered. He stumbled down the bank and roused his master.
Strangely enough, Frodo felt refreshed. He had been dreaming.
The dark shadow had passed, and a fair vision had visited him in this
land of disease. Nothing remained of it in his memory, yet because of
it he felt glad and lighter of heart. His burden was less heavy on
him. Gollum welcomed him with dog-like delight. He chuckled and
chattered, cracking his long ﬁngers, and pawing at Frodo’s knees.
Frodo smiled at him.
‘Come!’ he said. ‘You have guided us well and faithfully. This is
the last stage. Bring us to the Gate, and then I will not ask you to
go further. Bring us to the Gate, and you may go where you wish –
only not to our enemies.’
‘To the Gate, eh?’ Gollum squeaked, seeming surprised and frightened. ‘To the Gate, master says! Yes, he says so. And good Sméagol
does what he asks, O yes. But when we gets closer, we’ll see perhaps,
we’ll see then. It won’t look nice at all. O no! O no!’
‘Go on with you!’ said Sam. ‘Let’s get it over!’
In the falling dusk they scrambled out of the pit and slowly
threaded their way through the dead land. They had not gone far

THE PASSAGE OF THE MARSHES

635

before they felt once more the fear that had fallen on them when the
winged shape swept over the marshes. They halted, cowering on the
evil-smelling ground; but they saw nothing in the gloomy evening
sky above, and soon the menace passed, high overhead, going maybe
on some swift errand from Barad-dûr. After a while Gollum got up
and crept forward again, muttering and shaking.
About an hour after midnight the fear fell on them a third time,
but it now seemed more remote, as if it were passing far above the
clouds, rushing with terrible speed into the West. Gollum, however,
was helpless with terror, and was convinced that they were being
hunted, that their approach was known.
‘Three times!’ he whimpered. ‘Three times is a threat. They feel
us here, they feel the Precious. The Precious is their master. We
cannot go any further this way, no. It’s no use, no use!’
Pleading and kind words were no longer of any avail. It was not
until Frodo commanded him angrily and laid a hand on his sword-hilt
that Gollum would get up again. Then at last he rose with a snarl,
and went before them like a beaten dog.
So they stumbled on through the weary end of the night, and until
the coming of another day of fear they walked in silence with bowed
heads, seeing nothing, and hearing nothing but the wind hissing in
their ears.

Chapter 3
THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED
Before the next day dawned their journey to Mordor was over. The
marshes and the desert were behind them. Before them, darkling
against a pallid sky, the great mountains reared their threatening
heads.
Upon the west of Mordor marched the gloomy range of Ephel
Dúath, the Mountains of Shadow, and upon the north the broken
peaks and barren ridges of Ered Lithui, grey as ash. But as these
ranges approached one another, being indeed but parts of one great
wall about the mournful plains of Lithlad and of Gorgoroth, and the
bitter inland sea of Núrnen amidmost, they swung out long arms
northward; and between these arms there was a deep deﬁle. This
was Cirith Gorgor, the Haunted Pass, the entrance to the land of the
Enemy. High cliffs lowered upon either side, and thrust forward from
its mouth were two sheer hills, black-boned and bare. Upon them
stood the Teeth of Mordor, two towers strong and tall. In days long
past they were built by the Men of Gondor in their pride and power,
after the overthrow of Sauron and his ﬂight, lest he should seek to
return to his old realm. But the strength of Gondor failed, and men
slept, and for long years the towers stood empty. Then Sauron
returned. Now the watch-towers, which had fallen into decay, were
repaired, and ﬁlled with arms, and garrisoned with ceaseless vigilance.
Stony-faced they were, with dark window-holes staring north and
east and west, and each window was full of sleepless eyes.
Across the mouth of the pass, from cliff to cliff, the Dark Lord
had built a rampart of stone. In it there was a single gate of iron,
and upon its battlement sentinels paced unceasingly. Beneath the
hills on either side the rock was bored into a hundred caves and
maggot-holes; there a host of orcs lurked, ready at a signal to issue
forth like black ants going to war. None could pass the Teeth of
Mordor and not feel their bite, unless they were summoned by
Sauron, or knew the secret passwords that would open the Morannon, the black gate of his land.
The two hobbits gazed at the towers and the wall in despair. Even
from a distance they could see in the dim light the movement of the
black guards upon the wall, and the patrols before the gate. They lay
now peering over the edge of a rocky hollow beneath the outstretched
shadow of the northmost buttress of Ephel Dúath. Winging the heavy
air in a straight ﬂight a crow, maybe, would have ﬂown but a furlong

THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED

637

from their hiding-place to the black summit of the nearer tower. A
faint smoke curled above it, as if ﬁre smouldered in the hill beneath.
Day came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless ridges of
Ered Lithui. Then suddenly the cry of brazen-throated trumpets was
heard: from the watch-towers they blared, and far away from hidden
holds and outposts in the hills came answering calls; and further still,
remote but deep and ominous, there echoed in the hollow land
beyond the mighty horns and drums of Barad-dûr. Another dreadful
day of fear and toil had come to Mordor; and the night-guards were
summoned to their dungeons and deep halls, and the day-guards,
evil-eyed and fell, were marching to their posts. Steel gleamed dimly
on the battlement.
‘Well, here we are!’ said Sam. ‘Here’s the Gate, and it looks to
me as if that’s about as far as we are ever going to get. My word,
but the Gaffer would have a thing or two to say, if he saw me now!
Often said I’d come to a bad end, if I didn’t watch my step, he did.
But now I don’t suppose I’ll ever see the old fellow again. He’ll miss
his chance of I told ’ee so, Sam: more’s the pity. He could go on
telling me as long as he’d got breath, if only I could see his old face
again. But I’d have to get a wash ﬁrst, or he wouldn’t know me.
‘I suppose it’s no good asking ‘‘what way do we go now?’’ We
can’t go no further – unless we want to ask the Orcs for a lift.’
‘No, no!’ said Gollum. ‘No use. We can’t go further. Sméagol said
so. He said: we’ll go to the Gate, and then we’ll see. And we do see.
O yes, my precious, we do see. Sméagol knew hobbits could not go
this way. O yes, Sméagol knew.’
‘Then what the plague did you bring us here for?’ said Sam, not
feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable.
‘Master said so. Master says: Bring us to the Gate. So good
Sméagol does so. Master said so, wise master.’
‘I did,’ said Frodo. His face was grim and set, but resolute. He
was ﬁlthy, haggard, and pinched with weariness, but he cowered no
longer, and his eyes were clear. ‘I said so, because I purpose to enter
Mordor, and I know no other way. Therefore I shall go this way. I
do not ask anyone to go with me.’
‘No, no, master!’ wailed Gollum, pawing at him, and seeming in
great distress. ‘No use that way! No use! Don’t take the Precious to
Him! He’ll eat us all, if He gets it, eat all the world. Keep it, nice
master, and be kind to Sméagol. Don’t let Him have it. Or go away,
go to nice places, and give it back to little Sméagol. Yes, yes, master
give it back, eh? Sméagol will keep it safe; he will do lots of good,
especially to nice hobbits. Hobbits go home. Don’t go to the Gate!’

638

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I am commanded to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I
shall go,’ said Frodo. ‘If there is only one way, then I must take it.
What comes after must come.’
Sam said nothing. The look on Frodo’s face was enough for him;
he knew that words of his were useless. And after all he never had any
real hope in the affair from the beginning; but being a cheerful hobbit
he had not needed hope, as long as despair could be postponed. Now
they were come to the bitter end. But he had stuck to his master all
the way; that was what he had chieﬂy come for, and he would still
stick to him. His master would not go to Mordor alone. Sam would
go with him – and at any rate they would get rid of Gollum.
Gollum, however, did not intend to be got rid of, yet. He knelt
at Frodo’s feet, wringing his hands and squeaking. ‘Not this way,
master!’ he pleaded. ‘There is another way. O yes indeed there is.
Another way, darker, more difﬁcult to ﬁnd, more secret. But Sméagol
knows it. Let Sméagol show you!’
‘Another way!’ said Frodo doubtfully, looking down at Gollum
with searching eyes.
‘Yess! Yess indeed! There was another way. Sméagol found it.
Let’s go and see if it’s still there!’
‘You have not spoken of this before.’
‘No. Master did not ask. Master did not say what he meant to do.
He does not tell poor Sméagol. He says: Sméagol, take me to the
Gate – and then good-bye! Sméagol can run away and be good. But
now he says: I purpose to enter Mordor this way. So Sméagol is very
afraid. He does not want to lose nice master. And he promised,
master made him promise, to save the Precious. But master is going
to take it to Him, straight to the Black Hand, if master will go this
way. So Sméagol must save them both, and he thinks of another way
that there was, once upon a time. Nice master. Sméagol very good,
always helps.’
Sam frowned. If he could have bored holes in Gollum with his
eyes, he would have done. His mind was full of doubt. To all appearances Gollum was genuinely distressed and anxious to help Frodo.
But Sam, remembering the overheard debate, found it hard to believe
that the long submerged Sméagol had come out on top: that voice
at any rate had not had the last word in the debate. Sam’s guess was
that the Sméagol and Gollum halves (or what in his own mind he
called Slinker and Stinker) had made a truce and a temporary alliance:
neither wanted the Enemy to get the Ring; both wished to keep Frodo
from capture, and under their eye, as long as possible – at any rate
as long as Stinker still had a chance of laying hands on his ‘Precious’.

THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED

639

Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted.
‘And it’s a good thing neither half of the old villain don’t know
what master means to do,’ he thought. ‘If he knew that Mr. Frodo
is trying to put an end to his Precious for good and all, there’d be
trouble pretty quick, I bet. Anyhow old Stinker is so frightened of
the Enemy – and he’s under orders of some kind from him, or was
– that he’d give us away rather than be caught helping us; and rather
than let his Precious be melted, maybe. At least that’s my idea. And
I hope the master will think it out carefully. He’s as wise as any, but
he’s soft-hearted, that’s what he is. It’s beyond any Gamgee to guess
what he’ll do next.’
Frodo did not answer Gollum at once. While these doubts were
passing through Sam’s slow but shrewd mind, he stood gazing out
towards the dark cliff of Cirith Gorgor. The hollow in which they
had taken refuge was delved in the side of a low hill, at some little
height above a long trenchlike valley that lay between it and the outer
buttresses of the mountain-wall. In the midst of the valley stood the
black foundations of the western watch-tower. By morning-light the
roads that converged upon the Gate of Mordor could now be clearly
seen, pale and dusty; one winding back northwards; another dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui;
and a third that ran towards him. As it bent sharply round the tower,
it entered a narrow deﬁle and passed not far below the hollow where
he stood. Westward, to his right, it turned, skirting the shoulders of
the mountains, and went off southwards into the deep shadows that
mantled all the western sides of Ephel Dúath; beyond his sight it
journeyed on into the narrow land between the mountains and the
Great River.
As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and
movement on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the
march, though for the most part they were hidden by the reeks and
fumes drifting from the fens and wastes beyond. But here and there
he caught the gleam of spears and helmets; and over the levels beside
the roads horsemen could be seen riding in many companies. He
remembered his vision from afar upon Amon Hen, so few days before,
though now it seemed many years ago. Then he knew that the hope
that had for one wild moment stirred in his heart was vain. The
trumpets had not rung in challenge but in greeting. This was no
assault upon the Dark Lord by the men of Gondor, risen like avenging
ghosts from the graves of valour long passed away. These were Men
of other race, out of the wide Eastlands, gathering to the summons
of their Overlord; armies that had encamped before his Gate by night
and now marched in to swell his mounting power. As if suddenly
made fully aware of the peril of their position, alone, in the growing

640

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

light of day, so near to this vast menace, Frodo quickly drew his frail
grey hood close upon his head, and stepped down into the dell. Then
he turned to Gollum.
‘Sméagol,’ he said, ‘I will trust you once more. Indeed it seems
that I must do so, and that it is my fate to receive help from you,
where I least looked for it, and your fate to help me whom you long
pursued with evil purpose. So far you have deserved well of me and
have kept your promise truly. Truly, I say and mean,’ he added with
a glance at Sam, ‘for twice now we have been in your power, and
you have done no harm to us. Nor have you tried to take from me
what you once sought. May the third time prove the best! But I warn
you, Sméagol, you are in danger.’
‘Yes, yes, master!’ said Gollum. ‘Dreadful danger! Sméagol’s
bones shake to think of it, but he doesn’t run away. He must help
nice master.’
‘I did not mean the danger that we all share,’ said Frodo. ‘I mean
a danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call
the Precious. Remember that! It will hold you to it; but it will seek
a way to twist it to your own undoing. Already you are being twisted.
You revealed yourself to me just now, foolishly. Give it back to Sméagol
you said. Do not say that again! Do not let that thought grow in you!
You will never get it back. But the desire of it may betray you to a
bitter end. You will never get it back. In the last need, Sméagol, I
should put on the Precious; and the Precious mastered you long ago.
If I, wearing it, were to command you, you would obey, even if it
were to leap from a precipice or to cast yourself into the ﬁre. And
such would be my command. So have a care, Sméagol!’
Sam looked at his master with approval, but also with surprise:
there was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not
known before. It had always been a notion of his that the kindness
of dear Mr. Frodo was of such a high degree that it must imply a
fair measure of blindness. Of course, he also ﬁrmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the wisest person in the world (with
the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and of Gandalf ). Gollum in
his own way, and with much more excuse as his acquaintance was
much briefer, may have made a similar mistake, confusing kindness
and blindness. At any rate this speech abashed and terriﬁed him. He
grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but nice
master.
Frodo waited patiently for a while, then he spoke again less sternly.
‘Come now, Gollum or Sméagol if you wish, tell me of this other
way, and show me, if you can, what hope there is in it, enough to
justify me in turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.’
But Gollum was in a pitiable state, and Frodo’s threat had quite

THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED

641

unnerved him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him,
amid his mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions
in which he crawled on the ﬂoor and begged them both to be kind
to ‘poor little Sméagol’. After a while he grew a little calmer, and
Frodo gathered bit by bit that, if a traveller followed the road that
turned west of Ephel Dúath, he would come in time to a crossing in
a circle of dark trees. On the right a road went down to Osgiliath
and the bridges of the Anduin; in the middle the road went on
southwards.
‘On, on, on,’ said Gollum. ‘We never went that way, but they say
it goes a hundred leagues, until you can see the Great Water that is
never still. There are lots of ﬁshes there, and big birds eat ﬁshes: nice
birds: but we never went there, alas no! we never had a chance. And
further still there are more lands, they say, but the Yellow Face is
very hot there, and there are seldom any clouds, and the men are
ﬁerce and have dark faces. We do not want to see that land.’
‘No!’ said Frodo. ‘But do not wander from your road. What of
the third turning?’
‘O yes, O yes, there is a third way,’ said Gollum. ‘That is the road
to the left. At once it begins to climb up, up, winding and climbing
back towards the tall shadows. When it turns round the black rock,
you’ll see it, suddenly you’ll see it above you, and you’ll want to
hide.’
‘See it, see it? What will you see?’
‘The old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used to hear
tales from the South, when Sméagol was young, long ago. O yes, we
used to tell lots of tales in the evening, sitting by the banks of the
Great River, in the willow-lands, when the River was younger too,
gollum, gollum.’ He began to weep and mutter. The hobbits waited
patiently.
‘Tales out of the South,’ Gollum went on again, ‘about the tall
Men with the shining eyes, and their houses like hills of stone, and
the silver crown of their King and his White Tree: wonderful tales.
They built very tall towers, and one they raised was silver-white, and
in it there was a stone like the Moon, and round it were great white
walls. O yes, there were many tales about the Tower of the Moon.’
‘That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built,’
said Frodo. ‘It was Isildur who cut off the ﬁnger of the Enemy.’
‘Yes, He has only four on the Black Hand, but they are enough,’
said Gollum shuddering. ‘And He hated Isildur’s city.’
‘What does he not hate?’ said Frodo. ‘But what has the Tower of
the Moon to do with us?’
‘Well, master, there it was and there it is: the tall tower and
the white houses and the wall; but not nice now, not beautiful. He

642

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

conquered it long ago. It is a very terrible place now. Travellers shiver
when they see it, they creep out of sight, they avoid its shadow. But
master will have to go that way. That is the only other way. For the
mountains are lower there, and the old road goes up and up, until
it reaches a dark pass at the top, and then it goes down, down, again
– to Gorgoroth.’ His voice sank to a whisper and he shuddered.
‘But how will that help us?’ asked Sam. ‘Surely the Enemy knows
all about his own mountains, and that road will be guarded as close
as this? The tower isn’t empty, is it?’
‘O no, not empty!’ whispered Gollum. ‘It seems empty, but it
isn’t, O no! Very dreadful things live there. Orcs, yes always Orcs;
but worse things, worse things live there too. The road climbs right
under the shadow of the walls and passes the gate. Nothing moves
on the road that they don’t know about. The things inside know: the
Silent Watchers.’
‘So that’s your advice is it,’ said Sam, ‘that we should go another
long march south, to ﬁnd ourselves in the same ﬁx or a worse one,
when we get there, if we ever do?’
‘No, no indeed,’ said Gollum. ‘Hobbits must see, must try to
understand. He does not expect attack that way. His Eye is all round,
but it attends more to some places than to others. He can’t see
everything all at once, not yet. You see, He has conquered all the
country west of the Shadowy Mountains down to the River, and He
holds the bridges now. He thinks no one can come to the Moontower
without ﬁghting big battle at the bridges, or getting lots of boats
which they cannot hide and He will know about.’
‘You seem to know a lot about what He’s doing and thinking,’
said Sam. ‘Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing
with Orcs?’
‘Not nice hobbit, not sensible,’ said Gollum, giving Sam an angry
glance and turning to Frodo. ‘Sméagol has talked to Orcs, yes of
course, before he met master, and to many peoples: he has walked
very far. And what he says now many peoples are saying. It’s here
in the North that the big danger is for Him, and for us. He will come
out of the Black Gate one day, one day soon. That is the only way
big armies can come. But away down west He is not afraid, and there
are the Silent Watchers.’
‘Just so!’ said Sam, not to be put off. ‘And so we are to walk up
and knock at their gate and ask if we’re on the right road for Mordor?
Or are they too silent to answer? It’s not sense. We might as well do
it here, and save ourselves a long tramp.’
‘Don’t make jokes about it,’ hissed Gollum. ‘It isn’t funny, O no!
Not amusing. It’s not sense to try and get into Mordor at all. But if
master says I must go or I will go, then he must try some way. But he

THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED

643

must not go to the terrible city, O no, of course not. That is where
Sméagol helps, nice Sméagol, though no one tells him what it is all
about. Sméagol helps again. He found it. He knows it.’
‘What did you ﬁnd?’ asked Frodo.
Gollum crouched down and his voice sank to a whisper again. ‘A
little path leading up into the mountains; and then a stair, a narrow
stair, O yes, very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then’
– his voice sank even lower – ‘a tunnel, a dark tunnel; and at last a
little cleft, and a path high above the main pass. It was that way that
Sméagol got out of the darkness. But it was years ago. The path may
have vanished now; but perhaps not, perhaps not.’
‘I don’t like the sound of it at all,’ said Sam. ‘Sounds too easy at
any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it’ll be guarded too.
Wasn’t it guarded, Gollum?’ As he said this, he caught or fancied he
caught a green gleam in Gollum’s eye. Gollum muttered but did not
reply.
‘Is it not guarded?’ asked Frodo sternly. ‘And did you escape out
of the darkness, Sméagol? Were you not rather permitted to depart,
upon an errand? That at least is what Aragorn thought, who found
you by the Dead Marshes some years ago.’
‘It’s a lie!’ hissed Gollum, and an evil light came into his eyes at
the naming of Aragorn. ‘He lied on me, yes he did. I did escape, all
by my poor self. Indeed I was told to seek for the Precious; and I
have searched and searched, of course I have. But not for the Black
One. The Precious was ours, it was mine I tell you. I did escape.’
Frodo felt a strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for
once not so far from the truth as might be suspected; that he had
somehow found a way out of Mordor, and at least believed that it
was by his own cunning. For one thing, he noted that Gollum used
I, and that seemed usually to be a sign, on its rare appearances, that
some remnants of old truth and sincerity were for the moment on
top. But even if Gollum could be trusted on this point, Frodo did not
forget the wiles of the Enemy. The ‘escape’ may have been allowed or
arranged, and well known in the Dark Tower. And in any case Gollum
was plainly keeping a good deal back.
‘I ask you again,’ he said: ‘is not this secret way guarded?’
But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen mood. He
had all the injured air of a liar suspected when for once he has told
the truth, or part of it. He did not answer.
‘Is it not guarded?’ Frodo repeated.
‘Yes, yes, perhaps. No safe places in this country,’ said Gollum
sulkily. ‘No safe places. But master must try it or go home. No other
way.’ They could not get him to say more. The name of the perilous
place and the high pass he could not tell, or would not.

644

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Its name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful rumour. Aragorn
could perhaps have told them that name and its signiﬁcance; Gandalf
would have warned them. But they were alone, and Aragorn was far
away, and Gandalf stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with
Saruman, delayed by treason. Yet even as he spoke his last words to
Saruman, and the palantı́r crashed in ﬁre upon the steps of Orthanc,
his thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise, over the long leagues
his mind sought for them in hope and pity.
Maybe Frodo felt it, not knowing it, as he had upon Amon Hen,
even though he believed that Gandalf was gone, gone for ever into
the shadow in Moria far away. He sat upon the ground for a long
while, silent, his head bowed, striving to recall all that Gandalf had
said to him. But for this choice he could recall no counsel. Indeed
Gandalf ’s guidance had been taken from them too soon, too soon,
while the Dark Land was still very far away. How they should enter
it at the last Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could not say. Into
the stronghold of the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he had
once ventured. But into Mordor, to the Mountain of Fire and to
Barad-dûr, since the Dark Lord rose in power again, had he ever
journeyed there? Frodo did not think so. And here he was a little
halﬂing from the Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside,
expected to ﬁnd a way where the great ones could not go, or dared
not go. It was an evil fate. But he had taken it on himself in his own
sitting-room in the far-off spring of another year, so remote now that
it was like a chapter in a story of the world’s youth, when the Trees
of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This was an evil choice. Which
way should he choose? And if both led to terror and death, what
good lay in choice?
The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little grey hollow
where they lay, so near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence
that could be felt, as if it were a thick veil that cut them off from all
the world about them. Above them was a dome of pale sky barred
with ﬂeeting smoke, but it seemed high and far away, as if seen
through great deeps of air heavy with brooding thought.
Not even an eagle poised against the sun would have marked the
hobbits sitting there, under the weight of doom, silent, not moving,
shrouded in their thin grey cloaks. For a moment he might have
paused to consider Gollum, a tiny ﬁgure sprawling on the ground:
there perhaps lay the famished skeleton of some child of Men, its
ragged garment still clinging to it, its long arms and legs almost
bone-white and bone-thin: no ﬂesh worth a peck.
Frodo’s head was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back,
with hands behind his head, staring out of his hood at the empty sky.

THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED

645

At least for a long while it was empty. Then presently Sam thought
he saw a dark bird-like ﬁgure wheel into the circle of his sight, and
hover, and then wheel away again. Two more followed, and then a
fourth. They were very small to look at, yet he knew, somehow, that
they were huge, with a vast stretch of pinion, ﬂying at a great height.
He covered his eyes and bent forward, cowering. The same warning
fear was on him as he had felt in the presence of the Black Riders,
the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind and the
shadow on the moon, though now it was not so crushing or compelling: the menace was more remote. But menace it was. Frodo felt it
too. His thought was broken. He stirred and shivered, but he did not
look up. Gollum huddled himself together like a cornered spider.
The winged shapes wheeled, and stooped swiftly down, speeding
back to Mordor.
Sam took a deep breath. ‘The Riders are about again, up in the
air,’ he said in a hoarse whisper. ‘I saw them. Do you think they
could see us? They were very high up. And if they are Black Riders,
same as before, then they can’t see much by daylight, can they?’
‘No, perhaps not,’ said Frodo. ‘But their steeds could see. And
these winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably see
more than any other creature. They are like great carrion birds. They
are looking for something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.’
The feeling of dread passed, but the enfolding silence was broken.
For some time they had been cut off from the world, as if in an
invisible island; now they were laid bare again, peril had returned.
But still Frodo did not speak to Gollum or make his choice. His
eyes were closed, as if he were dreaming, or looking inward into his
heart and memory. At last he stirred and stood up, and it seemed
that he was about to speak and to decide. But ‘hark!’ he said. ‘What
is that?’
A new fear was upon them. They heard singing and hoarse shouting. At ﬁrst it seemed a long way off, but it drew nearer: it was
coming towards them. It leaped into all their minds that the Black
Wings had spied them and had sent armed soldiers to seize them:
no speed seemed too great for these terrible servants of Sauron. They
crouched, listening. The voices and the clink of weapons and harness
were very close. Frodo and Sam loosened their small swords in their
sheaths. Flight was impossible.
Gollum rose slowly and crawled insect-like to the lip of the hollow.
Very cautiously he raised himself inch by inch, until he could peer
over it between two broken points of stone. He remained there without moving for some time, making no sound. Presently the voices
began to recede again, and then they slowly faded away. Far off a

646

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

horn blew on the ramparts of the Morannon. Then quietly Gollum
drew back and slipped down into the hollow.
‘More Men going to Mordor,’ he said in a low voice. ‘Dark faces.
We have not seen Men like these before, no, Sméagol has not. They
are ﬁerce. They have black eyes, and long black hair, and gold rings
in their ears; yes, lots of beautiful gold. And some have red paint on
their cheeks, and red cloaks; and their ﬂags are red, and the tips of
their spears; and they have round shields, yellow and black with big
spikes. Not nice; very cruel wicked Men they look. Almost as bad as
Orcs, and much bigger. Sméagol thinks they have come out of the
South beyond the Great River’s end: they came up that road. They
have passed on to the Black Gate; but more may follow. Always more
people coming to Mordor. One day all the peoples will be inside.’
‘Were there any oliphaunts?’ asked Sam, forgetting his fear in his
eagerness for news of strange places.
‘No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts?’ said Gollum.
Sam stood up, putting his hands behind his back (as he always
did when ‘speaking poetry’), and began:
Grey as a mouse,
Big as a house,
Nose like a snake,
I make the earth shake,
As I tramp through the grass;
Trees crack as I pass.
With horns in my mouth
I walk in the South,
Flapping big ears.
Beyond count of years
I stump round and round,
Never lie on the ground,
Not even to die.
Oliphaunt am I,
Biggest of all,
Huge, old, and tall.
If ever you’d met me
You wouldn’t forget me.
If you never do,
You won’t think I’m true;
But old Oliphaunt am I,
And I never lie.

THE BLACK GATE IS CLOSED

647

‘That,’ said Sam, when he had ﬁnished reciting, ‘that’s a rhyme we
have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have
our tales too, and news out of the South, you know. In the old days
hobbits used to go on their travels now and again. Not that many
ever came back, and not that all they said was believed: news from
Bree, and not sure as Shiretalk, as the sayings go. But I’ve heard tales
of the big folk down away in the Sunlands. Swertings we call ’em in
our tales; and they ride on oliphaunts, ’tis said, when they ﬁght. They
put houses and towers on the oliphauntses backs and all, and the
oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another. So when you said
‘‘Men out of the South, all in red and gold,’’ I said ‘‘were there any
oliphaunts?’’ For if there was, I was going to take a look, risk or no.
But now I don’t suppose I’ll ever see an oliphaunt. Maybe there ain’t
no such a beast.’ He sighed.
‘No, no oliphaunts,’ said Gollum again. ‘Sméagol has not heard
of them. He does not want to see them. He does not want them to
be. Sméagol wants to go away from here and hide somewhere safer.
Sméagol wants master to go. Nice master, won’t he come with
Sméagol?’
Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst of all his cares when
Sam trotted out the old ﬁreside rhyme of Oliphaunt, and the laugh
had released him from hesitation. ‘I wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a white one at their head,’ he said. ‘Then
we’d break a way into this evil land, perhaps. But we’ve not; just our
own tired legs, that’s all. Well, Sméagol, the third turn may turn the
best. I will come with you.’
‘Good master, wise master, nice master!’ cried Gollum in delight,
patting Frodo’s knees. ‘Good master! Then rest now, nice hobbits,
under the shadow of the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie
quiet, till the Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft
and quick as shadows we must be!’

Chapter 4
OF HERBS AND
STEWED RABBIT
For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into
the shade as the sun moved, until at last the shadow of the western
rim of their dell grew long, and darkness ﬁlled all the hollow. Then
they ate a little, and drank sparingly. Gollum ate nothing, but he
accepted water gladly.
‘Soon get more now,’ he said, licking his lips. ‘Good water runs
down in streams to the Great River, nice water in the lands we are
going to. Sméagol will get food there too, perhaps. He’s very hungry,
yes, gollum!’ He set his two large ﬂat hands on his shrunken belly,
and a pale green light came into his eyes.
The dusk was deep when at length they set out, creeping over the
westward rim of the dell, and fading like ghosts into the broken
country on the borders of the road. The moon was now three nights
from the full, but it did not climb over the mountains until nearly
midnight, and the early night was very dark. A single red light burned
high up in the Towers of the Teeth, but otherwise no sign could be
seen or heard of the sleepless watch on the Morannon.
For many miles the red eye seemed to stare at them as they ﬂed,
stumbling through a barren stony country. They did not dare to take
the road, but they kept it on their left, following its line as well as
they could at a little distance. At last, when night was growing old
and they were already weary, for they had taken only one short rest,
the eye dwindled to a small ﬁery point and then vanished: they had
turned the dark northern shoulder of the lower mountains and were
heading southwards.
With hearts strangely lightened they now rested again, but not for
long. They were not going quick enough for Gollum. By his reckoning
it was nearly thirty leagues from the Morannon to the Cross-roads
above Osgiliath, and he hoped to cover that distance in four journeys.
So soon they struggled on once more, until the dawn began to spread
slowly in the wide grey solitude. They had then walked almost eight
leagues, and the hobbits could not have gone any further, even if
they had dared.
*
*
*

OF HERBS AND STEWED RABBIT

649

The growing light revealed to them a land already less barren and
ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their left, but
near at hand they could see the southward road, now bearing away
from the black roots of the hills and slanting westwards. Beyond it
were slopes covered with sombre trees like dark clouds, but all about
them lay a tumbled heathland, grown with ling and broom and cornel,
and other shrubs that they did not know. Here and there they saw
knots of tall pine-trees. The hearts of the hobbits rose again a little
in spite of weariness: the air was fresh and fragrant, and it reminded
them of the uplands of the Northfarthing far away. It seemed good
to be reprieved, to walk in a land that had only been for a few years
under the dominion of the Dark Lord and was not yet fallen wholly
into decay. But they did not forget their danger, nor the Black Gate
that was still all too near, hidden though it was behind the gloomy
heights. They looked about for a hiding-place where they could shelter from evil eyes while the light lasted.
The day passed uneasily. They lay deep in the heather and counted
out the slow hours, in which there seemed little change; for they were
still under the shadows of the Ephel Dúath, and the sun was veiled.
Frodo slept at times, deeply and peacefully, either trusting Gollum
or too tired to trouble about him; but Sam found it difﬁcult to do
more than doze, even when Gollum was plainly fast asleep, whifﬂing
and twitching in his secret dreams. Hunger, perhaps, more than
mistrust kept him wakeful: he had begun to long for a good homely
meal, ‘something hot out of the pot’.
As soon as the land faded into a formless grey under coming
night, they started out again. In a little while Gollum led them down
on to the southward road; and after that they went on more quickly,
though the danger was greater. Their ears were strained for the
sound of hoof or foot on the road ahead, or following them from
behind; but the night passed, and they heard no sound of walker or
rider.
The road had been made in a long lost time, and for perhaps thirty
miles below the Morannon it had been newly repaired, but as it
went south the wild encroached upon it. The handiwork of Men of
old could still be seen in its straight sure ﬂight and level course: now
and again it cut its way through hillside slopes, or leaped over a
stream upon a wide shapely arch of enduring masonry; but at last all
signs of stonework faded, save for a broken pillar here and there,
peering out of bushes at the side, or old paving-stones still lurking
amid weeds and moss. Heather and trees and bracken scrambled
down and overhung the banks, or sprawled out over the surface.
It dwindled at last to a country cart-road little used; but it did not

650

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

wind: it held on its own sure course and guided them by the swiftest
way.
So they passed into the northern marches of that land that Men
once called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift-falling
streams. The night became ﬁne under star and round moon, and it
seemed to the hobbits that the fragrance of the air grew as they went
forward; and from the blowing and muttering of Gollum it seemed
that he noticed it too, and did not relish it. At the ﬁrst signs of day
they halted again. They had come to the end of a long cutting, deep,
and sheer-sided in the middle, by which the road clove its way through
a stony ridge. Now they climbed up the westward bank and looked
abroad.
Day was opening in the sky, and they saw that the mountains were
now much further off, receding eastward in a long curve that was
lost in the distance. Before them, as they turned west, gentle slopes
ran down into dim hazes far below. All about them were small woods
of resinous trees, ﬁr and cedar and cypress, and other kinds unknown
in the Shire, with wide glades among them; and everywhere there
was a wealth of sweet-smelling herbs and shrubs. The long journey
from Rivendell had brought them far south of their own land, but
not until now in this more sheltered region had the hobbits felt the
change of clime. Here Spring was already busy about them: fronds
pierced moss and mould, larches were green-ﬁngered, small ﬂowers
were opening in the turf, birds were singing. Ithilien, the garden of
Gondor now desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness.
South and west it looked towards the warm lower vales of Anduin,
shielded from the east by the Ephel Dúath and yet not under the
mountain-shadow, protected from the north by the Emyn Muil, open
to the southern airs and the moist winds from the Sea far away. Many
great trees grew there, planted long ago, falling into untended age
amid a riot of careless descendants; and groves and thickets there
were of tamarisk and pungent terebinth, of olive and of bay; and
there were junipers and myrtles; and thymes that grew in bushes, or
with their woody creeping stems mantled in deep tapestries the
hidden stones; sages of many kinds putting forth blue ﬂowers, or red,
or pale green; and marjorams and new-sprouting parsleys, and many
herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden-lore of Sam. The grots
and rocky walls were already starred with saxifrages and stonecrops.
Primeroles and anemones were awake in the ﬁlbert-brakes; and
asphodel and many lily-ﬂowers nodded their half-opened heads in
the grass: deep green grass beside the pools, where falling streams
halted in cool hollows on their journey down to Anduin.
The travellers turned their backs on the road and went downhill.

OF HERBS AND STEWED RABBIT

651

As they walked, brushing their way through bush and herb, sweet
odours rose about them. Gollum coughed and retched; but the hobbits breathed deep, and suddenly Sam laughed, for heart’s ease not
for jest. They followed a stream that went quickly down before them.
Presently it brought them to a small clear lake in a shallow dell: it
lay in the broken ruins of an ancient stone basin, the carven rim of
which was almost wholly covered with mosses and rose-brambles;
iris-swords stood in ranks about it, and water-lily leaves ﬂoated on
its dark gently-rippling surface; but it was deep and fresh, and spilled
ever softly out over a stony lip at the far end.
Here they washed themselves and drank their ﬁll at the in-falling
freshet. Then they sought for a resting-place, and a hiding-place; for
this land, fair-seeming still, was nonetheless now territory of the
Enemy. They had not come very far from the road, and yet even in
so short a space they had seen scars of the old wars, and the newer
wounds made by the Orcs and other foul servants of the Dark Lord:
a pit of uncovered ﬁlth and refuse; trees hewn down wantonly and
left to die, with evil runes or the fell sign of the Eye cut in rude
strokes on their bark.
Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake, smelling and touching the unfamiliar plants and trees, forgetful for the moment of
Mordor, was reminded suddenly of their ever-present peril. He
stumbled on a ring still scorched by ﬁre, and in the midst of it he
found a pile of charred and broken bones and skulls. The swift growth
of the wild with briar and eglantine and trailing clematis was already
drawing a veil over this place of dreadful feast and slaughter; but it
was not ancient. He hurried back to his companions, but he said
nothing: the bones were best left in peace and not pawed and routed
by Gollum.
‘Let’s ﬁnd a place to lie up in,’ he said. ‘Not lower down. Higher
up for me.’
A little way back above the lake they found a deep brown bed of
last year’s fern. Beyond it was a thicket of dark-leaved bay-trees
climbing up a steep bank that was crowned with old cedars. Here
they decided to rest and pass the day, which already promised to be
bright and warm. A good day for strolling on their way along the
groves and glades of Ithilien; but though Orcs may shun the sunlight,
there were too many places here where they could lie hid and watch;
and other evil eyes were abroad: Sauron had many servants. Gollum,
in any case, would not move under the Yellow Face. Soon it would
look over the dark ridges of the Ephel Dúath, and he would faint
and cower in the light and heat.
Sam had been giving earnest thought to food as they marched.

652

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Now that the despair of the impassable Gate was behind him, he did
not feel so inclined as his master to take no thought for their livelihood
beyond the end of their errand; and anyway it seemed wiser to him
to save the waybread of the Elves for worse times ahead. Six days or
more had passed since he reckoned that they had only a bare supply
for three weeks.
‘If we reach the Fire in that time, we’ll be lucky at this rate!’ he
thought. ‘And we might be wanting to get back. We might!’
Besides, at the end of a long night-march, and after bathing and
drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper, or a breakfast, by the ﬁre in the old kitchen at Bagshot Row was what he really
wanted. An idea struck him and he turned to Gollum. Gollum had
just begun to sneak off on his own, and he was crawling away on all
fours through the fern.
‘Hi! Gollum!’ said Sam. ‘Where are you going? Hunting? Well,
see here, old noser, you don’t like our food, and I’d not be sorry for
a change myself. Your new motto’s always ready to help. Could you
ﬁnd anything ﬁt for a hungry hobbit?’
‘Yes, perhaps, yes,’ said Gollum. ‘Sméagol always helps, if they
asks – if they asks nicely.’
‘Right!’ said Sam. ‘I does ask. And if that isn’t nice enough, I
begs.’
Gollum disappeared. He was away some time, and Frodo after a
few mouthfuls of lembas settled deep into the brown fern and went
to sleep. Sam looked at him. The early daylight was only just creeping
down into the shadows under the trees, but he saw his master’s face
very clearly, and his hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside
him. He was reminded suddenly of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in
the house of Elrond, after his deadly wound. Then as he had kept
watch Sam had noticed that at times a light seemed to be shining
faintly within; but now the light was even clearer and stronger.
Frodo’s face was peaceful, the marks of fear and care had left it; but it
looked old, old and beautiful, as if the chiselling of the shaping years
was now revealed in many ﬁne lines that had before been hidden,
though the identity of the face was not changed. Not that Sam Gamgee
put it that way to himself. He shook his head, as if ﬁnding words
useless, and murmured: ‘I love him. He’s like that, and sometimes
it shines through, somehow. But I love him, whether or no.’
Gollum returned quietly and peered over Sam’s shoulder. Looking
at Frodo, he shut his eyes and crawled away without a sound. Sam
came to him a moment later and found him chewing something and
muttering to himself. On the ground beside him lay two small rabbits,
which he was beginning to eye greedily.

OF HERBS AND STEWED RABBIT

653

‘Sméagol always helps,’ he said. ‘He has brought rabbits, nice
rabbits. But master has gone to sleep, and perhaps Sam wants to
sleep. Doesn’t want rabbits now? Sméagol tries to help, but he can’t
catch things all in a minute.’
Sam, however, had no objection to rabbit at all, and said so. At
least not to cooked rabbit. All hobbits, of course, can cook, for they
begin to learn the art before their letters (which many never reach);
but Sam was a good cook, even by hobbit reckoning, and he had
done a good deal of the camp-cooking on their travels, when there
was a chance. He still hopefully carried some of his gear in his pack:
a small tinder-box, two small shallow pans, the smaller ﬁtting into
the larger; inside them a wooden spoon, a short two-pronged fork
and some skewers were stowed; and hidden at the bottom of the
pack in a ﬂat wooden box a dwindling treasure, some salt. But he
needed a ﬁre, and other things besides. He thought for a bit, while
he took out his knife, cleaned and whetted it, and began to dress the
rabbits. He was not going to leave Frodo alone asleep even for a few
minutes.
‘Now, Gollum,’ he said, ‘I’ve another job for you. Go and ﬁll
these pans with water, and bring ’em back!’
‘Sméagol will fetch water, yes,’ said Gollum. ‘But what does the
hobbit want all that water for? He has drunk, he has washed.’
‘Never you mind,’ said Sam. ‘If you can’t guess, you’ll soon ﬁnd
out. And the sooner you fetch the water, the sooner you’ll learn.
Don’t you damage one of my pans, or I’ll carve you into mincemeat.’
While Gollum was away Sam took another look at Frodo. He was
still sleeping quietly, but Sam was now struck most by the leanness
of his face and hands. ‘Too thin and drawn he is,’ he muttered. ‘Not
right for a hobbit. If I can get these coneys cooked, I’m going to
wake him up.’
Sam gathered a pile of the driest fern, and then scrambled up the
bank collecting a bundle of twigs and broken wood; the fallen branch
of a cedar at the top gave him a good supply. He cut out some turves
at the foot of the bank just outside the fern-brake, and made a shallow
hole and laid his fuel in it. Being handy with ﬂint and tinder he soon
had a small blaze going. It made little or no smoke but gave off an
aromatic scent. He was just stooping over his ﬁre, shielding it and
building it up with heavier wood, when Gollum returned, carrying
the pans carefully and grumbling to himself.
He set the pans down, and then suddenly saw what Sam was
doing. He gave a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened
and angry. ‘Ach! Sss – no!’ he cried. ‘No! Silly hobbits, foolish, yes
foolish! They mustn’t do it!’
‘Mustn’t do what?’ asked Sam in surprise.

654

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Not make the nassty red tongues,’ hissed Gollum. ‘Fire, ﬁre! It’s
dangerous, yes it is. It burns, it kills. And it will bring enemies, yes
it will.’
‘I don’t think so,’ said Sam. ‘Don’t see why it should, if you don’t
put wet stuff on it and make a smother. But if it does, it does. I’m
going to risk it, anyhow. I’m going to stew these coneys.’
‘Stew the rabbits!’ squealed Gollum in dismay. ‘Spoil beautiful
meat Sméagol saved for you, poor hungry Sméagol! What for? What
for, silly hobbit? They are young, they are tender, they are nice. Eat
them, eat them!’ He clawed at the nearest rabbit, already skinned
and lying by the ﬁre.
‘Now, now!’ said Sam. ‘Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes
you, and raw coney chokes me. If you give me a coney, the coney’s
mine, see, to cook, if I have a mind. And I have. You needn’t watch
me. Go and catch another and eat it as you fancy – somewhere private
and out o’ my sight. Then you won’t see the ﬁre, and I shan’t see
you, and we’ll both be the happier. I’ll see the ﬁre don’t smoke, if
that’s any comfort to you.’
Gollum withdrew grumbling, and crawled into the fern. Sam
busied himself with his pans. ‘What a hobbit needs with coney,’ he
said to himself, ‘is some herbs and roots, especially taters – not to
mention bread. Herbs we can manage, seemingly.’
‘Gollum!’ he called softly. ‘Third time pays for all. I want some
herbs.’ Gollum’s head peeped out of the fern, but his looks were
neither helpful nor friendly. ‘A few bay-leaves, some thyme and sage,
will do – before the water boils,’ said Sam.
‘No!’ said Gollum. ‘Sméagol is not pleased. And Sméagol doesn’t
like smelly leaves. He doesn’t eat grasses or roots, no precious, not
till he’s starving or very sick, poor Sméagol.’
‘Sméagol’ll get into real true hot water, when this water boils, if
he don’t do as he’s asked,’ growled Sam. ‘Sam’ll put his head in it,
yes precious. And I’d make him look for turnips and carrots, and
taters too, if it was the time o’ the year. I’ll bet there’s all sorts of
good things running wild in this country. I’d give a lot for half a
dozen taters.’
‘Sméagol won’t go, O no precious, not this time,’ hissed Gollum.
‘He’s frightened, and he’s very tired, and this hobbit’s not nice, not
nice at all. Sméagol won’t grub for roots and carrotses and – taters.
What’s taters, precious, eh, what’s taters?’
‘Po – ta – toes,’ said Sam. ‘The Gaffer’s delight, and rare good
ballast for an empty belly. But you won’t ﬁnd any, so you needn’t
look. But be good Sméagol and fetch me the herbs, and I’ll think
better of you. What’s more, if you turn over a new leaf, and keep it
turned, I’ll cook you some taters one of these days. I will: fried

OF HERBS AND STEWED RABBIT

655

ﬁsh and chips served by S. Gamgee. You couldn’t say no to that.’
‘Yes, yes we could. Spoiling nice ﬁsh, scorching it. Give me ﬁsh
now, and keep nassty chips!’
‘Oh you’re hopeless,’ said Sam. ‘Go to sleep!’
In the end he had to ﬁnd what he wanted for himself; but he did
not have to go far, not out of sight of the place where his master lay,
still sleeping. For a while Sam sat musing, and tending the ﬁre till
the water boiled. The daylight grew and the air became warm; the
dew faded off turf and leaf. Soon the rabbits cut up lay simmering
in their pans with the bunched herbs. Almost Sam fell asleep as the
time went by. He let them stew for close on an hour, testing them
now and again with his fork, and tasting the broth.
When he thought all was ready he lifted the pans off the ﬁre, and
crept along to Frodo. Frodo half opened his eyes as Sam stood over
him, and then he wakened from his dreaming: another gentle, unrecoverable dream of peace.
‘Hullo, Sam!’ he said. ‘Not resting? Is anything wrong? What is
the time?’
‘About a couple of hours after daybreak,’ said Sam, ‘and nigh on
half past eight by Shire clocks, maybe. But nothing’s wrong. Though
it ain’t quite what I’d call right: no stock, no onions, no taters. I’ve
got a bit of a stew for you, and some broth, Mr. Frodo. Do you
good. You’ll have to sup it in your mug; or straight from the pan,
when it’s cooled a bit. I haven’t brought no bowls, nor nothing
proper.’
Frodo yawned and stretched. ‘You should have been resting, Sam,’
he said. ‘And lighting a ﬁre was dangerous in these parts. But I do
feel hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed?’
‘A present from Sméagol,’ said Sam: ‘a brace o’ young coneys;
though I fancy Gollum’s regretting them now. But there’s naught to
go with them but a few herbs.’
Sam and his master sat just within the fern-brake and ate their stew
from the pans, sharing the old fork and spoon. They allowed themselves half a piece of the Elvish waybread each. It seemed a feast.
‘Wheew! Gollum!’ Sam called and whistled softly. ‘Come on! Still
time to change your mind. There’s some left, if you want to try
stewed coney.’ There was no answer.
‘Oh well, I suppose he’s gone off to ﬁnd something for himself.
We’ll ﬁnish it,’ said Sam.
‘And then you must take some sleep,’ said Frodo.
‘Don’t you drop off, while I’m nodding, Mr. Frodo. I don’t feel
too sure of him. There’s a good deal of Stinker – the bad Gollum,

656

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

if you understand me – in him still, and it’s getting stronger again.
Not but what I think he’d try to throttle me ﬁrst now. We don’t see
eye to eye, and he’s not pleased with Sam, O no precious, not pleased
at all.’
They ﬁnished, and Sam went off to the stream to rinse his gear. As
he stood up to return, he looked back up the slope. At that moment
he saw the sun rise out of the reek, or haze, or dark shadow, or
whatever it was, that lay ever to the east, and it sent its golden beams
down upon the trees and glades about him. Then he noticed a thin
spiral of blue-grey smoke, plain to see as it caught the sunlight, rising
from a thicket above him. With a shock he realized that this was the
smoke from his little cooking-ﬁre, which he had neglected to put out.
‘That won’t do! Never thought it would show like that!’ he muttered, and he started to hurry back. Suddenly he halted and listened.
Had he heard a whistle or not? Or was it the call of some strange
bird? If it was a whistle, it did not come from Frodo’s direction.
There it went again from another place! Sam began to run as well
as he could uphill.
He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had
kindled some fern at the edge of the ﬁre, and the fern blazing up had
set the turves smouldering. Hastily he stamped out what was left of
the ﬁre, scattered the ashes, and laid the turves on the hole. Then
he crept back to Frodo.
‘Did you hear a whistle, and what sounded like an answer?’ he
asked. ‘A few minutes back. I hope it was only a bird, but it didn’t
sound quite like that: more like somebody mimicking a bird-call, I
thought. And I’m afraid my bit of ﬁre’s been smoking. Now if I’ve
gone and brought trouble, I’ll never forgive myself. Nor won’t have
a chance, maybe!’
‘Hush!’ whispered Frodo. ‘I thought I heard voices.’
The two hobbits trussed their small packs, put them on ready for
ﬂight, and then crawled deeper into the fern. There they crouched
listening.
There was no doubt of the voices. They were speaking low and
furtively, but they were near, and coming nearer. Then quite suddenly
one spoke clearly close at hand.
‘Here! Here is where the smoke came from!’ it said. ‘ ’Twill be
nigh at hand. In the fern, no doubt. We shall have it like a coney in
a trap. Then we shall learn what kind of thing it is.’
‘Aye, and what it knows!’ said a second voice.
At once four men came striding through the fern from different
directions. Since ﬂight and hiding were no longer possible, Frodo

OF HERBS AND STEWED RABBIT

657

and Sam sprang to their feet, putting back to back and whipping out
their small swords.
If they were astonished at what they saw, their captors were even
more astonished. Four tall Men stood there. Two had spears in their
hands with broad bright heads. Two had great bows, almost of their
own height, and great quivers of long green-feathered arrows. All had
swords at their sides, and were clad in green and brown of varied
hues, as if the better to walk unseen in the glades of Ithilien. Green
gauntlets covered their hands, and their faces were hooded and
masked with green, except for their eyes, which were very keen and
bright. At once Frodo thought of Boromir, for these Men were like
him in stature and bearing, and in their manner of speech.
‘We have not found what we sought,’ said one. ‘But what have
we found?’
‘Not Orcs,’ said another, releasing the hilt of his sword, which he
had seized when he saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo’s hand.
‘Elves?’ said a third, doubtfully.
‘Nay! Not Elves,’ said the fourth, the tallest, and as it appeared
the chief among them. ‘Elves do not walk in Ithilien in these days.
And Elves are wondrous fair to look upon, or so ’tis said.’
‘Meaning we’re not, I take you,’ said Sam. ‘Thank you kindly.
And when you’ve ﬁnished discussing us, perhaps you’ll say who you
are, and why you can’t let two tired travellers rest.’
The tall green man laughed grimly. ‘I am Faramir, Captain of
Gondor,’ he said. ‘But there are no travellers in this land: only the
servants of the Dark Tower, or of the White.’
‘But we are neither,’ said Frodo. ‘And travellers we are, whatever
Captain Faramir may say.’
‘Then make haste to declare yourselves and your errand,’ said
Faramir. ‘We have a work to do, and this is no time or place for
riddling or parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company?’
‘The third?’
‘Yes, the skulking fellow that we saw with his nose in the pool
down yonder. He had an ill-favoured look. Some spying breed of
Orc, I guess, or a creature of theirs. But he gave us the slip by some
fox-trick.’
‘I do not know where he is,’ said Frodo. ‘He is only a chance
companion met upon our road, and I am not answerable for him. If
you come on him, spare him. Bring him or send him to us. He is
only a wretched gangrel creature, but I have him under my care for
a while. But as for us, we are Hobbits of the Shire, far to the North
and West, beyond many rivers. Frodo son of Drogo is my name, and
with me is Samwise son of Hamfast, a worthy hobbit in my service.
We have come by long ways – out of Rivendell, or Imladris as some

658

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

call it.’ Here Faramir started and grew intent. ‘Seven companions
we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left at Parth Galen above
Rauros: two of my kin; a Dwarf there was also, and an Elf, and two
Men. They were Aragorn; and Boromir, who said that he came out
of Minas Tirith, a city in the South.’
‘Boromir!’ all the four men exclaimed.
‘Boromir son of the Lord Denethor?’ said Faramir, and a strange
stern look came into his face. ‘You came with him? That is news
indeed, if it be true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir son of
Denethor was High Warden of the White Tower, and our CaptainGeneral: sorely do we miss him. Who are you then, and what had
you to do with him? Be swift, for the Sun is climbing!’
‘Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to
Rivendell?’ Frodo replied.
Seek for the Sword that was Broken.
In Imladris it dwells.
‘The words are known indeed,’ said Faramir in astonishment. ‘It
is some token of your truth that you also know them.’
‘Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,’
said Frodo. ‘And we are the Halﬂings that the rhyme spoke of.’
‘That I see,’ said Faramir thoughtfully. ‘Or I see that it might be
so. And what is Isildur’s Bane?’
‘That is hidden,’ answered Frodo. ‘Doubtless it will be made clear
in time.’
‘We must learn more of this,’ said Faramir, ‘and know what brings
you so far east under the shadow of yonder——,’ he pointed and
said no name. ‘But not now. We have business in hand. You are in
peril, and you would not have gone far by ﬁeld or road this day.
There will be hard handstrokes nigh at hand ere the day is full. Then
death, or swift ﬂight back to Anduin. I will leave two to guard you,
for your good and for mine. Wise man trusts not to chance-meeting
on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with you.’
‘Farewell!’ said Frodo, bowing low. ‘Think what you will, I am a
friend of all enemies of the One Enemy. We would go with you, if
we halﬂing folk could hope to serve you, such doughty men and
strong as you seem, and if my errand permitted it. May the light
shine on your swords!’
‘The Halﬂings are courteous folk, whatever else they be,’ said
Faramir. ‘Farewell!’
The hobbits sat down again, but they said nothing to one another
of their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just under the dappling

OF HERBS AND STEWED RABBIT

659

shadow of the dark bay-trees, two men remained on guard. They
took off their masks now and again to cool them, as the day-heat
grew, and Frodo saw that they were goodly men, pale-skinned, dark
of hair, with grey eyes and faces sad and proud. They spoke together
in soft voices, at ﬁrst using the Common Speech, but after the manner
of older days, and then changing to another language of their own.
To his amazement, as he listened Frodo became aware that it was
the elven-tongue that they spoke, or one but little different; and he
looked at them with wonder, for he knew then that they must be
Dúnedain of the South, men of the line of the Lords of Westernesse.
After a while he spoke to them; but they were slow and cautious
in answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers of Gondor, and they were Rangers of Ithilien; for they were
descended from folk who lived in Ithilien at one time, before it was
overrun. From such men the Lord Denethor chose his forayers, who
crossed the Anduin secretly (how or where, they would not say) to
harry the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between the Ephel
Dúath and the River.
‘It is close on ten leagues hence to the east-shore of Anduin,’ said
Mablung, ‘and we seldom come so far aﬁeld. But we have a new
errand on this journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse
them!’
‘Aye, curse the Southrons!’ said Damrod. ‘’Tis said that there
were dealings of old between Gondor and the kingdoms of the Harad
in the Far South; though there was never friendship. In those days
our bounds were away south beyond the mouths of Anduin, and
Umbar, the nearest of their realms, acknowledged our sway. But that
is long since. ’Tis many lives of Men since any passed to or fro
between us. Now of late we have learned that the Enemy has been
among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him – they
were ever ready to His will – as have so many also in the East. I
doubt not that the days of Gondor are numbered, and the walls of
Minas Tirith are doomed, so great is His strength and malice.’
‘But still we will not sit idle and let Him do all as He would,’
said Mablung. ‘These cursed Southrons come now marching up the
ancient roads to swell the hosts of the Dark Tower. Yea, up the very
roads that craft of Gondor made. And they go ever more heedlessly,
we learn, thinking that the power of their new master is great enough,
so that the mere shadow of His hills will protect them. We come to
teach them another lesson. Great strength of them was reported to
us some days ago, marching north. One of their regiments is due by
our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon – up on the road above,
where it passes through the cloven way. The road may pass, but they
shall not! Not while Faramir is Captain. He leads now in all perilous

660

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

ventures. But his life is charmed, or fate spares him for some other
end.’
Their talk died down into a listening silence. All seemed still and
watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered out.
With his keen hobbit-eyes he saw that many more Men were about.
He could see them stealing up the slopes, singly or in long ﬁles,
keeping always to the shade of grove or thicket, or crawling, hardly
visible in their brown and green raiment, through grass and brake.
All were hooded and masked, and had gauntlets on their hands, and
were armed like Faramir and his companions. Before long they had
all passed and vanished. The sun rose till it neared the South. The
shadows shrank.
‘I wonder where that dratted Gollum is?’ thought Sam, as he
crawled back into deeper shade. ‘He stands a fair chance of being
spitted for an Orc, or of being roasted by the Yellow Face. But I
fancy he’ll look after himself.’ He lay down beside Frodo and began
to doze.
He woke, thinking that he had heard horns blowing. He sat up.
It was now high noon. The guards stood alert and tense in the shadow
of the trees. Suddenly the horns rang out louder and beyond mistake
from above, over the top of the slope. Sam thought that he heard
cries and wild shouting also, but the sound was faint, as if it came
out of some distant cave. Then presently the noise of ﬁghting broke
out near at hand, just above their hiding-place. He could hear plainly
the ringing grate of steel on steel, the clang of sword on iron cap,
the dull beat of blade on shield; men were yelling and screaming,
and one clear loud voice was calling Gondor! Gondor!
‘It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,’ said
Sam to Frodo. ‘They’re as near as I want them now.’
But the noise grew closer. ‘They are coming!’ cried Damrod. ‘See!
Some of the Southrons have broken from the trap and are ﬂying
from the road. There they go! Our men after them, and the Captain
leading.’
Sam, eager to see more, went now and joined the guards. He
scrambled a little way up into one of the larger of the bay-trees. For
a moment he caught a glimpse of swarthy men in red running down
the slope some way off with green-clad warriors leaping after them,
hewing them down as they ﬂed. Arrows were thick in the air. Then
suddenly straight over the rim of their sheltering bank, a man fell,
crashing through the slender trees, nearly on top of them. He came to
rest in the fern a few feet away, face downward, green arrow-feathers
sticking from his neck below a golden collar. His scarlet robes were

OF HERBS AND STEWED RABBIT

661

tattered, his corslet of overlapping brazen plates was rent and hewn,
his black plaits of hair braided with gold were drenched with blood.
His brown hand still clutched the hilt of a broken sword.
It was Sam’s ﬁrst view of a battle of Men against Men, and he
did not like it much. He was glad that he could not see the dead
face. He wondered what the man’s name was and where he came
from; and if he was really evil of heart, or what lies or threats had
led him on the long march from his home; and if he would not really
rather have stayed there in peace – all in a ﬂash of thought which
was quickly driven from his mind. For just as Mablung stepped
towards the fallen body, there was a new noise. Great crying and
shouting. Amidst it Sam heard a shrill bellowing or trumpeting. And
then a great thudding and bumping, like huge rams dinning on the
ground.
‘Ware! Ware!’ cried Damrod to his companion. ‘May the Valar
turn him aside! Mûmak! Mûmak!’
To his astonishment and terror, and lasting delight, Sam saw a
vast shape crash out of the trees and come careering down the slope.
Big as a house, much bigger than a house, it looked to him, a grey-clad
moving hill. Fear and wonder, maybe, enlarged him in the hobbit’s
eyes, but the Mûmak of Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk, and
the like of him does not walk now in Middle-earth; his kin that live
still in latter days are but memories of his girth and majesty. On he
came, straight towards the watchers, and then swerved aside in the
nick of time, passing only a few yards away, rocking the ground
beneath their feet: his great legs like trees, enormous sail-like ears
spread out, long snout upraised like a huge serpent about to strike,
his small red eyes raging. His upturned hornlike tusks were bound
with bands of gold and dripped with blood. His trappings of scarlet
and gold ﬂapped about him in wild tatters. The ruins of what seemed
a very war-tower lay upon his heaving back, smashed in his furious
passage through the woods; and high upon his neck still desperately
clung a tiny ﬁgure – the body of a mighty warrior, a giant among the
Swertings.
On the great beast thundered, blundering in blind wrath through
pool and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about the
triple hide of his ﬂanks. Men of both sides ﬂed before him, but many
he overtook and crushed to the ground. Soon he was lost to view,
still trumpeting and stamping far away. What became of him Sam
never heard: whether he escaped to roam the wild for a time, until
he perished far from his home or was trapped in some deep pit; or
whether he raged on until he plunged in the Great River and was
swallowed up.
*
*
*

662

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Sam drew a deep breath. ‘An Oliphaunt it was!’ he said. ‘So there
are Oliphaunts, and I have seen one. What a life! But no one at home
will ever believe me. Well, if that’s over, I’ll have a bit of sleep.’
‘Sleep while you may,’ said Mablung. ‘But the Captain will return,
if he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We shall
be pursued as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy, and that
will not be long.’
‘Go quietly when you must!’ said Sam. ‘No need to disturb my
sleep. I was walking all night.’
Mablung laughed. ‘I do not think the Captain will leave you here,
Master Samwise,’ he said. ‘But you shall see.’

Chapter 5
THE WINDOW ON THE WEST
It seemed to Sam that he had only dozed for a few minutes when he
awoke to ﬁnd that it was late afternoon and Faramir had come back.
He had brought many men with him; indeed all the survivors of the
foray were now gathered on the slope nearby, two or three hundred
strong. They sat in a wide semicircle, between the arms of which
Faramir was seated on the ground, while Frodo stood before him. It
looked strangely like the trial of a prisoner.
Sam crept out from the fern, but no one paid any attention to
him, and he placed himself at the end of the rows of men, where he
could see and hear all that was going on. He watched and listened
intently, ready to dash to his master’s aid if needed. He could see
Faramir’s face, which was now unmasked: it was stern and commanding, and a keen wit lay behind his searching glance. Doubt was in
the grey eyes that gazed steadily at Frodo.
Sam soon became aware that the Captain was not satisﬁed with
Frodo’s account of himself at several points: what part he had to play
in the Company that set out from Rivendell; why he had left Boromir;
and where he was now going. In particular he returned often to
Isildur’s Bane. Plainly he saw that Frodo was concealing from him
some matter of great importance.
‘But it was at the coming of the Halﬂing that Isildur’s Bane should
waken, or so one must read the words,’ he insisted. ‘If then you
are the Halﬂing that was named, doubtless you brought this thing,
whatever it may be, to the Council of which you speak, and there
Boromir saw it. Do you deny it?’
Frodo made no answer. ‘So!’ said Faramir. ‘I wish then to learn
from you more of it; for what concerns Boromir concerns me. An
orc-arrow slew Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are
plenty, and the sight of one would not be taken as a sign of Doom
by Boromir of Gondor. Had you this thing in keeping? It is hidden,
you say; but is not that because you choose to hide it?’
‘No, not because I choose,’ answered Frodo. ‘It does not belong
to me. It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if
any could claim it, it would be Aragorn son of Arathorn, whom I
named, the leader of our Company from Moria to Rauros.’
‘Why so, and not Boromir, prince of the City that the sons of
Elendil founded?’
‘Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage, father to father,

664

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

from Isildur Elendil’s son himself. And the sword that he bears was
Elendil’s sword.’
A murmur of astonishment ran through all the ring of men. Some
cried aloud: ‘The sword of Elendil! The sword of Elendil comes to
Minas Tirith! Great tidings!’ But Faramir’s face was unmoved.
‘Maybe,’ he said. ‘But so great a claim will need to be established,
and clear proofs will be required, should this Aragorn ever come to
Minas Tirith. He had not come, nor any of your Company, when I
set out six days ago.’
‘Boromir was satisﬁed of that claim,’ said Frodo. ‘Indeed, if
Boromir were here, he would answer all your questions. And since
he was already at Rauros many days back, and intended then to go
straight to your city, if you return, you may soon learn the answers
there. My part in the Company was known to him, as to all the
others, for it was appointed to me by Elrond of Imladris himself
before the whole Council. On that errand I came into this country,
but it is not mine to reveal to any outside the Company. Yet those
who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder it.’
Frodo’s tone was proud, whatever he felt, and Sam approved of
it; but it did not appease Faramir.
‘So!’ he said. ‘You bid me mind my own affairs, and get me back
home, and let you be. Boromir will tell all, when he comes. When
he comes, say you! Were you a friend of Boromir?’
Vividly before Frodo’s mind came the memory of Boromir’s
assault upon him, and for a moment he hesitated. Faramir’s eyes
watching him grew harder. ‘Boromir was a valiant member of our
Company,’ said Frodo at length. ‘Yes, I was his friend, for my part.’
Faramir smiled grimly. ‘Then you would grieve to learn that
Boromir is dead?’
‘I would grieve indeed,’ said Frodo. Then catching the look in
Faramir’s eyes, he faltered. ‘Dead?’ he said. ‘Do you mean that he is
dead, and that you knew it? You have been trying to trap me in words,
playing with me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?’
‘I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,’ said Faramir.
‘How then did he die, and how do you know of it? Since you say
that none of the Company had reached the city when you left.’
‘As to the manner of his death, I had hoped that his friend and
companion would tell me how it was.’
‘But he was alive and strong when we parted. And he lives still
for all that I know. Though surely there are many perils in the world.’
‘Many indeed,’ said Faramir, ‘and treachery not the least.’
Sam had been getting more and more impatient and angry at this
conversation. These last words were more than he could bear, and

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

665

bursting into the middle of the ring, he strode up to his master’s side.
‘Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,’ he said, ‘but this has gone on
long enough. He’s no right to talk to you so. After all you’ve gone
through, as much for his good and all these great Men as for anyone
else.
‘See here, Captain!’ He planted himself squarely in front of
Faramir, his hands on his hips, and a look on his face as if he was
addressing a young hobbit who had offered him what he called ‘sauce’
when questioned about visits to the orchard. There was some murmuring, but also some grins on the faces of the men looking on: the
sight of their Captain sitting on the ground and eye to eye with a
young hobbit, legs well apart, bristling with wrath, was one beyond
their experience. ‘See here!’ he said. ‘What are you driving at? Let’s
come to the point before all the Orcs of Mordor come down on us!
If you think my master murdered this Boromir and then ran away,
you’ve got no sense; but say it, and have done! And then let us know
what you mean to do about it. But it’s a pity that folk as talk about
ﬁghting the Enemy can’t let others do their bit in their own way
without interfering. He’d be mighty pleased, if he could see you now.
Think he’d got a new friend, he would.’
‘Patience!’ said Faramir, but without anger. ‘Do not speak before
your master, whose wit is greater than yours. And I do not need any
to teach me of our peril. Even so, I spare a brief time, in order to
judge justly in a hard matter. Were I as hasty as you, I might have
slain you long ago. For I am commanded to slay all whom I ﬁnd in
this land without the leave of the Lord of Gondor. But I do not slay
man or beast needlessly, and not gladly even when it is needed.
Neither do I talk in vain. So be comforted. Sit by your master, and
be silent!’
Sam sat down heavily with a red face. Faramir turned to Frodo
again. ‘You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead.
Tidings of death have many wings. Night oft brings news to near kindred,
’tis said. Boromir was my brother.’
A shadow of sorrow passed over his face. ‘Do you remember aught
of special mark that the Lord Boromir bore with him among his
gear?’
Frodo thought for a moment, fearing some further trap, and
wondering how this debate would turn in the end. He had hardly
saved the Ring from the proud grasp of Boromir, and how he would
fare now among so many men, warlike and strong, he did not know.
Yet he felt in his heart that Faramir, though he was much like his
brother in looks, was a man less self-regarding, both sterner and
wiser. ‘I remember that Boromir bore a horn,’ he said at last.
‘You remember well, and as one who has in truth seen him,’ said

666

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Faramir. ‘Then maybe you can see it in your mind’s eye: a great
horn of the wild ox of the East, bound with silver, and written with
ancient characters. That horn the eldest son of our house has borne
for many generations; and it is said that if it be blown at need anywhere within the bounds of Gondor, as the realm was of old, its voice
will not pass unheeded.
‘Five days ere I set out on this venture, eleven days ago at about
this hour of the day, I heard the blowing of that horn: from the
northward it seemed, but dim, as if it were but an echo in the mind.
A boding of ill we thought it, my father and I, for no tidings had we
heard of Boromir since he went away, and no watcher on our borders
had seen him pass. And on the third night after another and a stranger
thing befell me.
‘I sat at night by the waters of Anduin, in the grey dark under the
young pale moon, watching the ever-moving stream; and the sad
reeds were rustling. So do we ever watch the shores nigh Osgiliath,
which our enemies now partly hold, and issue from it to harry our
lands. But that night all the world slept at the midnight hour. Then
I saw, or it seemed that I saw, a boat ﬂoating on the water, glimmering
grey, a small boat of a strange fashion with a high prow, and there
was none to row or steer it.
‘An awe fell on me, for a pale light was round it. But I rose and
went to the bank, and began to walk out into the stream, for I was
drawn towards it. Then the boat turned towards me, and stayed its
pace, and ﬂoated slowly by within my hand’s reach, yet I durst not
handle it. It waded deep, as if it were heavily burdened, and it seemed
to me as it passed under my gaze that it was almost ﬁlled with clear
water, from which came the light; and lapped in the water a warrior
lay asleep.
‘A broken sword was on his knee. I saw many wounds on him. It
was Boromir, my brother, dead. I knew his gear, his sword, his
beloved face. One thing only I missed: his horn. One thing only I
knew not: a fair belt, as it were of linked golden leaves, about his waist.
Boromir! I cried. Where is thy horn? Whither goest thou? O Boromir! But
he was gone. The boat turned into the stream and passed glimmering
on into the night. Dreamlike it was, and yet no dream, for there was
no waking. And I do not doubt that he is dead and has passed down
the River to the Sea.’
‘Alas!’ said Frodo. ‘That was indeed Boromir as I knew him. For
the golden belt was given to him in Lothlórien by the Lady Galadriel.
She it was that clothed us as you see us, in elven-grey. This brooch
is of the same workmanship.’ He touched the green and silver leaf
that fastened his cloak beneath his throat.

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

667

Faramir looked closely at it. ‘It is beautiful,’ he said. ‘Yes, ’tis
work of the same craft. So then you passed through the Land of
Lórien? Laurelindórenan it was named of old, but long now it has
lain beyond the knowledge of Men,’ he added softly, regarding Frodo
with a new wonder in his eyes. ‘Much that was strange about you I
begin now to understand. Will you not tell me more? For it is a bitter
thought that Boromir died, within sight of the land of his home.’
‘No more can I say than I have said,’ answered Frodo. ‘Though
your tale ﬁlls me with foreboding. A vision it was that you saw, I
think, and no more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or
will be. Unless indeed it is some lying trick of the Enemy. I have
seen the faces of fair warriors of old laid in sleep beneath the pools
of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so by his foul arts.’
‘Nay, it was not so,’ said Faramir. ‘For his works ﬁll the heart
with loathing; but my heart was ﬁlled with grief and pity.’
‘Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth?’ asked Frodo.
‘For no boat could have been carried over the stony hills from Tol
Brandir; and Boromir purposed to go home across the Entwash and
the ﬁelds of Rohan. And yet how could any vessel ride the foam of
the great falls and not founder in the boiling pools, though laden
with water?’
‘I know not,’ said Faramir. ‘But whence came the boat?’
‘From Lórien,’ said Frodo. ‘In three such boats we rowed down
Anduin to the Falls. They also were of elven-work.’
‘You passed through the Hidden Land,’ said Faramir, ‘but it seems
that you little understood its power. If Men have dealings with the
Mistress of Magic who dwells in the Golden Wood, then they may
look for strange things to follow. For it is perilous for mortal man to
walk out of the world of this Sun, and few of old came thence
unchanged, ’tis said.
‘Boromir, O Boromir!’ he cried. ‘What did she say to you, the Lady
that dies not? What did she see? What woke in your heart then? Why
went you ever to Laurelindórenan, and came not by your own road, upon
the horses of Rohan riding home in the morning?’
Then turning again to Frodo, he spoke in a quiet voice once more.
‘To those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frodo
son of Drogo. But not here or now, maybe. But lest you still should
think my tale a vision, I will tell you this. The horn of Boromir at
least returned in truth, and not in seeming. The horn came, but it
was cloven in two, as it were by axe or sword. The shards came
severally to shore: one was found among the reeds where watchers
of Gondor lay, northwards below the infalls of the Entwash; the other
was found spinning on the ﬂood by one who had an errand on the
water. Strange chances, but murder will out, ’tis said.

668

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘And now the horn of the elder son lies in two pieces upon the
lap of Denethor, sitting in his high chair, waiting for news. And you
can tell me nothing of the cleaving of the horn?’
‘No, I did not know of it,’ said Frodo. ‘But the day when you
heard it blowing, if your reckoning is true, was the day when we
parted, when I and my servant left the Company. And now your tale
ﬁlls me with dread. For if Boromir was then in peril and was slain,
I must fear that all my companions perished too. And they were my
kindred and my friends.
‘Will you not put aside your doubt of me and let me go? I am
weary, and full of grief, and afraid. But I have a deed to do, or to
attempt, before I too am slain. And the more need of haste, if we
two halﬂings are all that remain of our fellowship.
‘Go back, Faramir, valiant Captain of Gondor, and defend your
city while you may, and let me go where my doom takes me.’
‘For me there is no comfort in our speech together,’ said Faramir;
‘but you surely draw from it more dread than need be. Unless the
people of Lórien themselves came to him, who arrayed Boromir as
for a funeral? Not Orcs or servants of the Nameless. Some of your
Company, I guess, live still.
‘But whatever befell on the North March, you, Frodo, I doubt no
longer. If hard days have made me any judge of Men’s words and
faces, then I may make a guess at Halﬂings! Though,’ and now he
smiled, ‘there is something strange about you, Frodo, an Elvish air,
maybe. But more lies upon our words together than I thought at
ﬁrst. I should now take you back to Minas Tirith to answer there to
Denethor, and my life will justly be forfeit, if I now choose a course
that proves ill for my city. So I will not decide in haste what is to be
done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.’
He sprang to his feet and issued some orders. At once the men
who were gathered round him broke up into small groups, and went
off this way and that, vanishing quickly into the shadows of the rocks
and trees. Soon only Mablung and Damrod remained.
‘Now you, Frodo and Samwise, will come with me and my guards,’
said Faramir. ‘You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was
your purpose. It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely
watched after this affray than it has been yet. And you cannot, I
think, go far today in any case, for you are weary. And so are we.
We are going now to a secret place we have, somewhat less than ten
miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the Enemy have not found
it yet, and if they did, we could hold it long even against many. There
we may lie up and rest for a while, and you with us. In the morning
I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.’
*
*
*

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

669

There was nothing for Frodo to do but to fall in with this request,
or order. It seemed in any case a wise course for the moment, since
this foray of the men of Gondor had made a journey in Ithilien more
dangerous than ever.
They set out at once: Mablung and Damrod a little ahead, and
Faramir with Frodo and Sam behind. Skirting the hither side of the
pool where the hobbits had bathed, they crossed the stream, climbed
a long bank, and passed into green-shadowed woodlands that
marched ever downwards and westwards. While they walked, as
swiftly as the hobbits could go, they talked in hushed voices.
‘I broke off our speech together,’ said Faramir, ‘not only because
time pressed, as Master Samwise had reminded me, but also because
we were drawing near to matters that were better not debated openly
before many men. It was for that reason that I turned rather to the
matter of my brother and let be Isildur’s Bane. You were not wholly
frank with me, Frodo.’
‘I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,’ said Frodo.
‘I do not blame you,’ said Faramir. ‘You spoke with skill in a hard
place, and wisely, it seemed to me. But I learned or guessed more
from you than your words said. You were not friendly with Boromir,
or you did not part in friendship. You, and Master Samwise, too, I
guess have some grievance. Now I loved him dearly, and would gladly
avenge his death, yet I knew him well. Isildur’s Bane – I would hazard
that Isildur’s Bane lay between you and was a cause of contention in
your Company. Clearly it is a mighty heirloom of some sort, and
such things do not breed peace among confederates, not if aught
may be learned from ancient tales. Do I not hit near the mark?’
‘Near,’ said Frodo, ‘but not in the gold. There was no contention
in our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we
should take from the Emyn Muil. But be that as it may, ancient tales
teach us also the peril of rash words concerning such things as –
heirlooms.’
‘Ah, then it is as I thought: your trouble was with Boromir alone.
He wished this thing brought to Minas Tirith. Alas! it is a crooked
fate that seals your lips who saw him last, and holds from me that
which I long to know: what was in his heart and thought in his latest
hours. Whether he erred or no, of this I am sure: he died well,
achieving some good thing. His face was more beautiful even than
in life.
‘But, Frodo, I pressed you hard at ﬁrst about Isildur’s Bane. Forgive
me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not had time for
thought. We had had a hard ﬁght, and there was more than enough
to ﬁll my mind. But even as I spoke with you, I drew nearer to the
mark, and so deliberately shot wider. For you must know that much

670

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

is still preserved of ancient lore among the Rulers of the city that is
not spread abroad. We of my house are not of the line of Elendil,
though the blood of Númenor is in us. For we reckon back our line
to Mardil, the good steward, who ruled in the king’s stead when he
went away to war. And that was King Eärnur, last of the line of
Anárion, and childless, and he came never back. And the stewards
have governed the city since that day, though it was many generations
of Men ago.
‘And this I remember of Boromir as a boy, when we together
learned the tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always
it displeased him that his father was not king. ‘‘How many hundreds
of years needs it to make a steward a king, if the king returns not?’’
he asked. ‘‘Few years, maybe, in other places of less royalty,’’ my
father answered. ‘‘In Gondor ten thousand years would not sufﬁce.’’
Alas! poor Boromir. Does that not tell you something of him?’
‘It does,’ said Frodo. ‘Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.’
‘I doubt it not,’ said Faramir. ‘If he were satisﬁed of Aragorn’s
claim, as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch had
not yet come. They had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become
rivals in her wars.
‘But I stray. We in the house of Denethor know much ancient
lore by long tradition, and there are moreover in our treasuries many
things preserved: books and tablets writ on withered parchments,
yea, and on stone, and on leaves of silver and of gold, in divers
characters. Some none can now read; and for the rest, few ever unlock
them. I can read a little in them, for I have had teaching. It was these
records that brought the Grey Pilgrim to us. I ﬁrst saw him when I
was a child, and he has been twice or thrice since then.’
‘The Grey Pilgrim?’ said Frodo. ‘Had he a name?’
‘Mithrandir we called him in elf-fashion,’ said Faramir, ‘and he
was content. Many are my names in many countries, he said. Mithrandir
among the Elves, Tharkûn to the Dwarves; Olórin I was in my youth in
the West that is forgotten, in the South Incánus, in the North Gandalf;
to the East I go not.’
‘Gandalf !’ said Frodo. ‘I thought it was he. Gandalf the Grey,
dearest of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in
Moria.’
‘Mithrandir was lost!’ said Faramir. ‘An evil fate seems to have
pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one of so
great wisdom, and of power – for many wonderful things he did
among us – could perish, and so much lore be taken from the world.
Are you sure of this, and that he did not just leave you and depart
where he would?’
‘Alas! yes,’ said Frodo. ‘I saw him fall into the abyss.’

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

671

‘I see that there is some great tale of dread in this,’ said Faramir,
‘which perhaps you may tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir
was, I now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the
deeds that are done in our time. Had he been among us to consult
concerning the hard words of our dream, he could have made them
clear to us without need of messenger. Yet, maybe, he would not
have done so, and the journey of Boromir was doomed. Mithrandir
never spoke to us of what was to be, nor did he reveal his purposes.
He got leave of Denethor, how I do not know, to look at the secrets
of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would teach
(and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would question us
above all else concerning the Great Battle that was fought upon
Dagorlad in the beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not
name was overthrown. And he was eager for stories of Isildur, though
of him we had less to tell; for nothing certain was ever known among
us of his end.’
Now Faramir’s voice sank to a whisper. ‘But this much I learned,
or guessed, and I have kept it ever secret in my heart since: that
Isildur took somewhat from the hand of the Unnamed, ere he went
away from Gondor, never to be seen among mortal men again. Here
I thought was the answer to Mithrandir’s questioning. But it seemed
then a matter that concerned only the seekers after ancient learning.
Nor when the riddling words of our dream were debated among us,
did I think of Isildur’s Bane as being this same thing. For Isildur was
ambushed and slain by orc-arrows, according to the only legend that
we knew, and Mithrandir had never told me more.
‘What in truth this Thing is I cannot yet guess; but some heirloom
of power and peril it must be. A fell weapon, perchance, devised by
the Dark Lord. If it were a thing that gave advantage in battle, I can
well believe that Boromir, the proud and fearless, often rash, ever
anxious for the victory of Minas Tirith (and his own glory therein),
might desire such a thing and be allured by it. Alas that ever he went
on that errand! I should have been chosen by my father and the
elders, but he put himself forward, as being the older and the hardier
(both true), and he would not be stayed.
‘But fear no more! I would not take this thing, if it lay by the
highway. Not were Minas Tirith falling in ruin and I alone could
save her, so, using the weapon of the Dark Lord for her good and
my glory. No, I do not wish for such triumphs, Frodo son of Drogo.’
‘Neither did the Council,’ said Frodo. ‘Nor do I. I would have
nothing to do with such matters.’
‘For myself,’ said Faramir, ‘I would see the White Tree in ﬂower
again in the courts of the kings, and the Silver Crown return, and
Minas Tirith in peace: Minas Anor again as of old, full of light, high

672

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and fair, beautiful as a queen among other queens: not a mistress of
many slaves, nay, not even a kind mistress of willing slaves. War must
be, while we defend our lives against a destroyer who would devour
all; but I do not love the bright sword for its sharpness, nor the arrow
for its swiftness, nor the warrior for his glory. I love only that which
they defend: the city of the Men of Númenor; and I would have her
loved for her memory, her ancientry, her beauty, and her present
wisdom. Not feared, save as men may fear the dignity of a man, old
and wise.
‘So fear me not! I do not ask you to tell me more. I do not even
ask you to tell me whether I now speak nearer the mark. But if you
will trust me, it may be that I can advise you in your present quest,
whatever that be – yes, and even aid you.’
Frodo made no answer. Almost he yielded to the desire for help
and counsel, to tell this grave young man, whose words seemed so
wise and fair, all that was in his mind. But something held him back.
His heart was heavy with fear and sorrow: if he and Sam were indeed,
as seemed likely, all that was now left of the Nine Walkers, then he
was in sole command of the secret of their errand. Better mistrust
undeserved than rash words. And the memory of Boromir, of the
dreadful change that the lure of the Ring had worked in him, was
very present to his mind, when he looked at Faramir and listened to
his voice: unlike they were, and yet also much akin.
They walked on in silence for a while, passing like grey and green
shadows under the old trees, their feet making no sound; above them
many birds sang, and the sun glistened on the polished roof of dark
leaves in the evergreen woods of Ithilien.
Sam had taken no part in the conversation, though he had listened;
and at the same time he had attended with his keen hobbit ears to
all the soft woodland noises about them. One thing he had noted,
that in all the talk the name of Gollum had not once come up. He
was glad, though he felt that it was too much to hope that he would
never hear it again. He soon became aware also that though they
walked alone, there were many men close at hand: not only Damrod
and Mablung ﬂitting in and out of the shadows ahead, but others on
either side, all making their swift secret way to some appointed place.
Once, looking suddenly back, as if some prickle of the skin told
him that he was watched from behind, he thought he caught a brief
glimpse of a small dark shape slipping behind a tree-trunk. He opened
his mouth to speak and shut it again. ‘I’m not sure of it,’ he said to
himself, ‘and why should I remind them of the old villain, if they
choose to forget him? I wish I could!’
*
*
*

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

673

So they passed on, until the woodlands grew thinner and the land
began to fall more steeply. Then they turned aside again, to the right,
and came quickly to a small river in a narrow gorge: it was the same
stream that trickled far above out of the round pool, now grown to
a swift torrent, leaping down over many stones in a deep-cloven bed,
overhung with ilex and dark box-woods. Looking west they could
see, below them in a haze of light, lowlands and broad meads, and
glinting far off in the westering sun the wide waters of the Anduin.
‘Here, alas! I must do you a discourtesy,’ said Faramir. ‘I hope
you will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way
to courtesy as not to slay you or to bind you. But it is a command
that no stranger, not even one of Rohan that ﬁghts with us, shall see
the path we now go with open eyes. I must blindfold you.’
‘As you will,’ said Frodo. ‘Even the Elves do likewise at need, and
blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlórien. Gimli the dwarf
took it ill, but the hobbits endured it.’
‘It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,’ said Faramir. ‘But
I am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force.’
He called softly and immediately Mablung and Damrod stepped
out of the trees and came back to him. ‘Blindfold these guests,’ said
Faramir. ‘Securely, but not so as to discomfort them. Do not tie their
hands. They will give their word not to try and see. I could trust
them to shut their eyes of their own accord, but eyes will blink, if
the feet stumble. Lead them so that they do not falter.’
With green scarves the two guards now bound up the hobbits’
eyes, and drew their hoods down almost to their mouths; then quickly
they took each one by the hand and went on their way. All that Frodo
and Sam knew of this last mile of the road they learned from guessing in the dark. After a little they found that they were on a path
descending steeply; soon it grew so narrow that they went in single
ﬁle, brushing a stony wall on either side; their guards steered them
from behind with hands laid ﬁrmly on their shoulders. Now and
again they came to rough places and were lifted from their feet for
a while, and then set down again. Always the noise of the running
water was on their right hand, and it grew nearer and louder. At
length they were halted. Quickly Mablung and Damrod turned them
about, several times, and they lost all sense of direction. They climbed
upwards a little: it seemed cold and the noise of the stream had
become faint. Then they were picked up and carried down, down
many steps, and round a corner. Suddenly they heard the water again,
loud now, rushing and splashing. All round them it seemed, and they
felt a ﬁne rain on their hands and cheeks. At last they were set on
their feet once more. For a moment they stood so, half fearful, blindfold, not knowing where they were; and no one spoke.

674

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Then came the voice of Faramir close behind. ‘Let them see!’ he
said. The scarves were removed and their hoods drawn back, and
they blinked and gasped.
They stood on a wet ﬂoor of polished stone, the doorstep, as it
were, of a rough-hewn gate of rock opening dark behind them. But
in front a thin veil of water was hung, so near that Frodo could have
put an outstretched arm into it. It faced westward. The level shafts
of the setting sun behind beat upon it, and the red light was broken
into many ﬂickering beams of ever-changing colour. It was as if they
stood at the window of some elven-tower, curtained with threaded
jewels of silver and gold, and ruby, sapphire and amethyst, all kindled
with an unconsuming ﬁre.
‘At least by good chance we came at the right hour to reward you
for your patience,’ said Faramir. ‘This is the Window of the Sunset,
Henneth Annûn, fairest of all the falls of Ithilien, land of many fountains. Few strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall
behind to match it. Enter now and see!’
Even as he spoke the sun sank, and the ﬁre faded in the ﬂowing
water. They turned and passed under the low forbidding arch. At
once they found themselves in a rock-chamber, wide and rough, with
an uneven stooping roof. A few torches were kindled and cast a dim
light on the glistening walls. Many men were already there. Others
were still coming in by twos and threes through a dark narrow door
on one side. As their eyes grew accustomed to the gloom the hobbits
saw that the cave was larger than they had guessed and was ﬁlled
with great store of arms and victuals.
‘Well, here is our refuge,’ said Faramir. ‘Not a place of great ease,
but here you may pass the night in peace. It is dry at least, and there
is food, though no ﬁre. At one time the water ﬂowed down through
this cave and out of the arch, but its course was changed further up
the gorge, by workmen of old, and the stream sent down in a fall of
doubled height over the rocks far above. All the ways into this grot
were then sealed against the entry of water or aught else, all save
one. There are now but two ways out: that passage yonder by which
you entered blindfold, and through the Window-curtain into a deep
bowl ﬁlled with knives of stone. Now rest a while, until the evening
meal is set.’
The hobbits were taken to a corner and given a low bed to lie on,
if they wished. Meanwhile men busied themselves about the cave,
quietly and in orderly quickness. Light tables were taken from the
walls and set up on trestles and laden with gear. This was plain and
unadorned for the most part, but all well and fairly made: round

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

675

platters, bowls and dishes of glazed brown clay or turned box-wood,
smooth and clean. Here and there was a cup or basin of polished
bronze; and a goblet of plain silver was set by the Captain’s seat in
the middle of the inmost table.
Faramir went about among the men, questioning each as he came
in, in a soft voice. Some came back from the pursuit of the Southrons;
others, left behind as scouts near the road, came in latest. All the
Southrons had been accounted for, save only the great mûmak: what
happened to him none could say. Of the enemy no movement could
be seen; not even an orc-spy was abroad.
‘You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?’ Faramir asked of the latest
comer.
‘Well, no, lord,’ said the man. ‘No Orc at least. But I saw, or
thought I saw, something a little strange. It was getting deep dusk,
when the eyes make things greater than they should be. So perhaps
it may have been no more than a squirrel.’ Sam pricked up his ears
at this. ‘Yet if so, it was a black squirrel, and I saw no tail. ’Twas
like a shadow on the ground, and it whisked behind a tree-trunk
when I drew nigh and went up aloft as swift as any squirrel could.
You will not have us slay wild beasts for no purpose, and it seemed
no more, so I tried no arrow. It was too dark for sure shooting anyway,
and the creature was gone into the gloom of the leaves in a twinkling.
But I stayed for a while, for it seemed strange, and then I hastened
back. I thought I heard the thing hiss at me from high above as I
turned away. A large squirrel, maybe. Perhaps under the shadow of
the Unnamed some of the beasts of Mirkwood are wandering hither
to our woods. They have black squirrels there, ’tis said.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Faramir. ‘But that would be an ill omen, if it were
so. We do not want the escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien.’ Sam fancied
that he gave a swift glance towards the hobbits as he spoke; but Sam
said nothing. For a while he and Frodo lay back and watched the
torchlight, and the men moving to and fro speaking in hushed voices.
Then suddenly Frodo fell asleep.
Sam struggled with himself, arguing this way and that. ‘He may be
all right,’ he thought, ‘and then he may not. Fair speech may hide a
foul heart.’ He yawned. ‘I could sleep for a week, and I’d be better for
it. And what can I do, if I do keep awake, me all alone, and all these
great Men about? Nothing, Sam Gamgee; but you’ve got to keep
awake all the same.’ And somehow he managed it. The light faded
from the cave door, and the grey veil of falling water grew dim and
was lost in gathering shadow. Always the sound of the water went
on, never changing its note, morning or evening or night. It murmured and whispered of sleep. Sam stuck his knuckles in his eyes.
*
*
*

676

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Now more torches were being lit. A cask of wine was broached.
Storage barrels were being opened. Men were fetching water from
the fall. Some were laving their hands in basins. A wide copper bowl
and a white cloth were brought to Faramir and he washed.
‘Wake our guests,’ he said, ‘and take them water. It is time to eat.’
Frodo sat up and yawned and stretched. Sam, not used to being
waited on, looked with some surprise at the tall man who bowed,
holding a basin of water before him.
‘Put it on the ground, master, if you please!’ he said. ‘Easier for
me and you.’ Then to the astonishment and amusement of the Men
he plunged his head into the cold water and splashed his neck and
ears.
‘Is it the custom in your land to wash the head before supper?’
said the man who waited on the hobbits.
‘No, before breakfast,’ said Sam. ‘But if you’re short of sleep cold
water on the neck’s like rain on a wilted lettuce. There! Now I can
keep awake long enough to eat a bit.’
They were led then to seats beside Faramir: barrels covered with
pelts and high enough above the benches of the Men for their convenience. Before they ate, Faramir and all his men turned and faced
west in a moment of silence. Faramir signed to Frodo and Sam that
they should do likewise.
‘So we always do,’ he said, as they sat down: ‘we look towards
Númenor that was, and beyond to Elvenhome that is, and to that
which is beyond Elvenhome and will ever be. Have you no such
custom at meat?’
‘No,’ said Frodo, feeling strangely rustic and untutored. ‘But if
we are guests, we bow to our host, and after we have eaten we rise
and thank him.’
‘That we do also,’ said Faramir.
After so long journeying and camping, and days spent in the lonely
wild, the evening meal seemed a feast to the hobbits: to drink pale
yellow wine, cool and fragrant, and eat bread and butter, and salted
meats, and dried fruits, and good red cheese, with clean hands and
clean knives and plates. Neither Frodo nor Sam refused anything
that was offered, nor a second, nor indeed a third helping. The wine
coursed in their veins and tired limbs, and they felt glad and easy of
heart as they had not done since they left the land of Lórien.
When all was done Faramir led them to a recess at the back of
the cave, partly screened by curtains; and a chair and two stools were
brought there. A little earthenware lamp burned in a niche.
‘You may soon desire to sleep,’ he said, ‘and especially good Samwise, who would not close his eyes before he ate – whether for fear

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

677

of blunting the edge of a noble hunger, or for fear of me, I do not
know. But it is not good to sleep too soon after meat, and that
following a fast. Let us talk a while. On your journey from Rivendell
there must have been many things to tell. And you, too, would perhaps wish to learn something of us and the lands where you now are.
Tell me of Boromir my brother, and of old Mithrandir, and of the
fair people of Lothlórien.’
Frodo no longer felt sleepy and he was willing to talk. But though
the food and wine had put him at his ease, he had not lost all his
caution. Sam was beaming and humming to himself, but when Frodo
spoke he was at ﬁrst content to listen, only occasionally venturing to
make an exclamation of agreement.
Frodo told many tales, yet always he steered the matter away from
the quest of the Company and from the Ring, enlarging rather on
the valiant part Boromir had played in all their adventures, with the
wolves of the wild, in the snows under Caradhras, and in the mines
of Moria where Gandalf fell. Faramir was most moved by the story
of the ﬁght on the bridge.
‘It must have irked Boromir to run from Orcs,’ he said, ‘or even
from the fell thing you name, the Balrog – even though he was the
last to leave.’
‘He was the last,’ said Frodo, ‘but Aragorn was forced to lead us.
He alone knew the way after Gandalf ’s fall. But had there not been
us lesser folk to care for, I do not think that either he or Boromir
would have ﬂed.’
‘Maybe, it would have been better had Boromir fallen there with
Mithrandir,’ said Faramir, ‘and not gone on to the fate that waited
above the falls of Rauros.’
‘Maybe. But tell me now of your own fortunes,’ said Frodo, turning the matter aside once again. ‘For I would learn more of Minas
Ithil and Osgiliath, and Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What hope
have you for that city in your long war?’
‘What hope have we?’ said Faramir. ‘It is long since we had any
hope. The sword of Elendil, if it returns indeed, may rekindle it, but
I do not think that it will do more than put off the evil day, unless
other help unlooked-for also comes, from Elves or Men. For the
Enemy increases and we decrease. We are a failing people, a springless
autumn.
‘The Men of Númenor were settled far and wide on the shores
and seaward regions of the Great Lands, but for the most part they
fell into evils and follies. Many became enamoured of the Darkness
and the black arts; some were given over wholly to idleness and ease,
and some fought among themselves, until they were conquered in
their weakness by the wild men.

678

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘It is not said that evil arts were ever practised in Gondor, or that
the Nameless One was ever named in honour there; and the old
wisdom and beauty brought out of the West remained long in the
realm of the sons of Elendil the Fair, and they linger there still. Yet
even so it was Gondor that brought about its own decay, falling by
degrees into dotage, and thinking that the Enemy was asleep, who
was only banished not destroyed.
‘Death was ever present, because the Númenóreans still, as they
had in their old kingdom, and so lost it, hungered after endless life
unchanging. Kings made tombs more splendid than houses of the
living, and counted old names in the rolls of their descent dearer
than the names of sons. Childless lords sat in aged halls musing on
heraldry; in secret chambers withered men compounded strong
elixirs, or in high cold towers asked questions of the stars. And the
last king of the line of Anárion had no heir.
‘But the stewards were wiser and more fortunate. Wiser, for they
recruited the strength of our people from the sturdy folk of the seacoast, and from the hardy mountaineers of Ered Nimrais. And they
made a truce with the proud peoples of the North, who often had
assailed us, men of ﬁerce valour, but our kin from afar off, unlike
the wild Easterlings or the cruel Haradrim.
‘So it came to pass in the days of Cirion the Twelfth Steward (and
my father is the six and twentieth) that they rode to our aid and at
the great Field of Celebrant they destroyed our enemies that had
seized our northern provinces. These are the Rohirrim, as we name
them, masters of horses, and we ceded to them the ﬁelds of Calenardhon that are since called Rohan; for that province had long been
sparsely peopled. And they became our allies, and have ever proved
true to us, aiding us at need, and guarding our northern marches
and the Gap of Rohan.
‘Of our lore and manners they have learned what they would, and
their lords speak our speech at need; yet for the most part they hold
by the ways of their own fathers and to their own memories, and
they speak among themselves their own North tongue. And we love
them: tall men and fair women, valiant both alike, golden-haired,
bright-eyed, and strong; they remind us of the youth of Men, as they
were in the Elder Days. Indeed it is said by our lore-masters that
they have from of old this afﬁnity with us that they are come from
those same Three Houses of Men as were the Númenóreans in their
beginning; not from Hador the Goldenhaired, the Elf-friend, maybe,
yet from such of his people as went not over Sea into the West,
refusing the call.
‘For so we reckon Men in our lore, calling them the High, or Men
of the West, which were Númenóreans; and the Middle Peoples,

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

679

Men of the Twilight, such as are the Rohirrim and their kin that
dwell still far in the North; and the Wild, the Men of Darkness.
‘Yet now, if the Rohirrim are grown in some ways more like to
us, enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too have become more like
to them, and can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are
become Middle Men, of the Twilight, but with memory of other
things. For as the Rohirrim do, we now love war and valour as things
good in themselves, both a sport and an end; and though we still
hold that a warrior should have more skills and knowledge than only
the craft of weapons and slaying, we esteem a warrior, nonetheless,
above men of other crafts. Such is the need of our days. So even was
my brother, Boromir: a man of prowess, and for that he was accounted
the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of
Minas Tirith has for long years been so hardy in toil, so onward into
battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.’ Faramir sighed
and fell silent for a while.
‘You don’t say much in all your tales about the Elves, sir,’ said
Sam, suddenly plucking up courage. He had noted that Faramir
seemed to refer to Elves with reverence, and this even more than his
courtesy, and his food and wine, had won Sam’s respect and quieted
his suspicions.
‘No indeed, Master Samwise,’ said Faramir, ‘for I am not learned
in Elven-lore. But there you touch upon another point in which we
have changed, declining from Númenor to Middle-earth. For as you
may know, if Mithrandir was your companion and you have spoken
with Elrond, the Edain, the Fathers of the Númenóreans, fought
beside the Elves in the ﬁrst wars, and were rewarded by the gift of
the kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight of Elvenhome. But
in Middle-earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days of
darkness, by the arts of the Enemy, and by the slow changes of time
in which each kind walked further down their sundered roads. Men
now fear and misdoubt the Elves, and yet know little of them. And
we of Gondor grow like other Men, like the men of Rohan; for even
they, who are foes of the Dark Lord, shun the Elves and speak of
the Golden Wood with dread.
‘Yet there are among us still some who have dealings with the
Elves when they may, and ever and anon one will go in secret to
Lórien, seldom to return. Not I. For I deem it perilous now for mortal
man wilfully to seek out the Elder People. Yet I envy you that have
spoken with the White Lady.’
‘The Lady of Lórien! Galadriel!’ cried Sam. ‘You should see her,
indeed you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening’s my job
at home, sir, if you understand me, and I’m not much good at poetry

680

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

– not at making it: a bit of a comic rhyme, perhaps, now and again,
you know, but not real poetry – so I can’t tell you what I mean. It
ought to be sung. You’d have to get Strider, Aragorn that is, or old
Mr. Bilbo, for that. But I wish I could make a song about her.
Beautiful she is, sir! Lovely! Sometimes like a great tree in ﬂower,
sometimes like a white daffadowndilly, small and slender like. Hard
as di’monds, soft as moonlight. Warm as sunlight, cold as frost in
the stars. Proud and far-off as a snow-mountain, and as merry as any
lass I ever saw with daisies in her hair in springtime. But that’s a lot
o’ nonsense, and all wide of my mark.’
‘Then she must be lovely indeed,’ said Faramir. ‘Perilously fair.’
‘I don’t know about perilous,’ said Sam. ‘It strikes me that folk
takes their peril with them into Lórien, and ﬁnds it there because
they’ve brought it. But perhaps you could call her perilous, because
she’s so strong in herself. You, you could dash yourself to pieces on
her, like a ship on a rock; or drownd yourself, like a hobbit in a river.
But neither rock nor river would be to blame. Now Boro——’ He
stopped and went red in the face.
‘Yes? Now Boromir you would say?’ said Faramir. ‘What would
you say? He took his peril with him?’
‘Yes sir, begging your pardon, and a ﬁne man as your brother was,
if I may say so. But you’ve been warm on the scent all along. Now
I watched Boromir and listened to him, from Rivendell all down the
road – looking after my master, as you’ll understand, and not meaning
any harm to Boromir – and it’s my opinion that in Lórien he ﬁrst
saw clearly what I guessed sooner: what he wanted. From the moment
he ﬁrst saw it he wanted the Enemy’s Ring!’
‘Sam!’ cried Frodo aghast. He had fallen deep into his own
thoughts for a while, and came out of them suddenly and too late.
‘Save me!’ said Sam turning white, and then ﬂushing scarlet.
‘There I go again! When ever you open your big mouth you put your
foot in it the Gaffer used to say to me, and right enough. O dear,
O dear!
‘Now look here, sir!’ He turned, facing up to Faramir with all the
courage that he could muster. ‘Don’t you go taking advantage of my
master because his servant’s no better than a fool. You’ve spoken
very handsome all along, put me off my guard, talking of Elves and
all. But handsome is as handsome does we say. Now’s a chance to show
your quality.’
‘So it seems,’ said Faramir, slowly and very softly, with a strange
smile. ‘So that is the answer to all the riddles! The One Ring that
was thought to have perished from the world. And Boromir tried to
take it by force? And you escaped? And ran all the way – to me! And
here in the wild I have you: two halﬂings, and a host of men at my

THE WINDOW ON THE WEST

681

call, and the Ring of Rings. A pretty stroke of fortune! A chance for
Faramir, Captain of Gondor, to show his quality! Ha!’ He stood up,
very tall and stern, his grey eyes glinting.
Frodo and Sam sprang from their stools and set themselves side
by side with their backs to the wall, fumbling for their sword-hilts.
There was a silence. All the men in the cave stopped talking and
looked towards them in wonder. But Faramir sat down again in his
chair and began to laugh quietly, and then suddenly became grave
again.
‘Alas for Boromir! It was too sore a trial!’ he said. ‘How you have
increased my sorrow, you two strange wanderers from a far country,
bearing the peril of Men! But you are less judges of Men than I of
Halﬂings. We are truth-speakers, we men of Gondor. We boast seldom, and then perform, or die in the attempt. Not if I found it on the
highway would I take it I said. Even if I were such a man as to desire
this thing, and even though I knew not clearly what this thing was
when I spoke, still I should take those words as a vow, and be held
by them.
‘But I am not such a man. Or I am wise enough to know that
there are some perils from which a man must ﬂee. Sit at peace! And
be comforted, Samwise. If you seem to have stumbled, think that it
was fated to be so. Your heart is shrewd as well as faithful, and saw
clearer than your eyes. For strange though it may seem, it was safe
to declare this to me. It may even help the master that you love. It
shall turn to his good, if it is in my power. So be comforted. But do
not even name this thing again aloud. Once is enough.’
The hobbits came back to their seats and sat very quiet. Men
turned back to their drink and their talk, perceiving that their captain
had had some jest or other with the little guests, and that it was over.
‘Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,’ said Faramir. ‘If you took this thing on yourself, unwilling, at others’ asking,
then you have pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to
keep it hid and not to use it. You are a new people and a new world
to me. Are all your kin of like sort? Your land must be a realm of
peace and content, and there must gardeners be in high honour.’
‘Not all is well there,’ said Frodo, ‘but certainly gardeners are
honoured.’
‘But folk must grow weary there, even in their gardens, as do all
things under the Sun of this world. And you are far from home and
wayworn. No more tonight. Sleep, both of you – in peace, if you
can. Fear not! I do not wish to see it, or touch it, or know more of
it than I know (which is enough), lest peril perchance waylay me and
I fall lower in the test than Frodo son of Drogo. Go now to rest –

682

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

but ﬁrst tell me only, if you will, whither you wish to go, and what
to do. For I must watch, and wait, and think. Time passes. In the
morning we must each go swiftly on the ways appointed to us.’
Frodo had felt himself trembling as the ﬁrst shock of fear passed.
Now a great weariness came down on him like a cloud. He could
dissemble and resist no longer.
‘I was going to ﬁnd a way into Mordor,’ he said faintly. ‘I was
going to Gorgoroth. I must ﬁnd the Mountain of Fire and cast the
thing into the gulf of Doom. Gandalf said so. I do not think I shall
ever get there.’
Faramir stared at him for a moment in grave astonishment. Then
suddenly he caught him as he swayed, and lifting him gently, carried
him to the bed and laid him there, and covered him warmly. At once
he fell into a deep sleep.
Another bed was set beside him for his servant. Sam hesitated for
a moment, then bowing very low: ‘Good night, Captain, my lord,’
he said. ‘You took the chance, sir.’
‘Did I so?’ said Faramir.
‘Yes sir, and showed your quality: the very highest.’
Faramir smiled. ‘A pert servant, Master Samwise. But nay: the
praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. Yet there was naught
in this to praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.’
‘Ah well, sir,’ said Sam, ‘you said my master had an Elvish air;
and that was good and true. But I can say this: you have an air too,
sir, that reminds me of, of – well, Gandalf, of wizards.’
‘Maybe,’ said Faramir. ‘Maybe you discern from far away the air
of Númenor. Good night!’

Chapter 6
THE FORBIDDEN POOL
Frodo woke to ﬁnd Faramir bending over him. For a second old
fears seized him and he sat up and shrank away.
‘There is nothing to fear,’ said Faramir.
‘Is it morning already?’ said Frodo yawning.
‘Not yet, but night is drawing to an end, and the full moon is
setting. Will you come and see it? Also there is a matter on which I
desire your counsel. I am sorry to rouse you from sleep, but will you
come?’
‘I will,’ said Frodo, rising and shivering a little as he left the warm
blanket and pelts. It seemed cold in the ﬁreless cave. The noise of
the water was loud in the stillness. He put on his cloak and followed
Faramir.
Sam, waking suddenly by some instinct of watchfulness, saw ﬁrst
his master’s empty bed and leapt to his feet. Then he saw two dark
ﬁgures, Frodo and a man, framed against the archway, which was
now ﬁlled with a pale white light. He hurried after them, past rows
of men sleeping on mattresses along the wall. As he went by the
cave-mouth he saw that the Curtain was now become a dazzling veil
of silk and pearls and silver thread: melting icicles of moonlight. But
he did not pause to admire it, and turning aside he followed his
master through the narrow doorway in the wall of the cave.
They went ﬁrst along a black passage, then up many wet steps,
and so came to a small ﬂat landing cut in the stone and lit by the
pale sky, gleaming high above through a long deep shaft. From here
two ﬂights of steps led: one going on, as it seemed, up on to the high
bank of the stream; the other turning away to the left. This they
followed. It wound its way up like a turret-stair.
At last they came out of the stony darkness and looked about.
They were on a wide ﬂat rock without rail or parapet. At their right,
eastwards, the torrent fell, splashing over many terraces, and then,
pouring down a steep race, it ﬁlled a smooth-hewn channel with a
dark force of water ﬂecked with foam, and curling and rushing almost
at their feet it plunged sheer over the edge that yawned upon their
left. A man stood there, near the brink, silent, gazing down.
Frodo turned to watch the sleek necks of the water as they curved
and dived. Then he lifted his eyes and gazed far away. The world
was quiet and cold, as if dawn were near. Far off in the West the full

684

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

moon was sinking, round and white. Pale mists shimmered in the
great vale below: a wide gulf of silver fume, beneath which rolled the
cool night-waters of the Anduin. A black darkness loomed beyond,
and in it glinted, here and there, cold, sharp, remote, white as the
teeth of ghosts, the peaks of Ered Nimrais, the White Mountains of
the realm of Gondor, tipped with everlasting snow.
For a while Frodo stood there on the high stone, and a shiver ran
through him, wondering if anywhere in the vastness of the nightlands
his old companions walked or slept, or lay dead shrouded in mist.
Why was he brought here out of forgetful sleep?
Sam was eager for an answer to the same question and could not
refrain himself from muttering, for his master’s ear alone as he
thought: ‘It’s a ﬁne view, no doubt, Mr. Frodo, but chilly to the
heart, not to mention the bones! What’s going on?’
Faramir heard and answered. ‘Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil,
as he goes from Middle-earth, glances upon the white locks of old
Mindolluin. It is worth a few shivers. But that is not what I brought
you to see – though as for you, Samwise, you were not brought, and
do but pay the penalty of your watchfulness. A draught of wine shall
amend it. Come, look now!’
He stepped up beside the silent sentinel on the dark edge, and
Frodo followed. Sam hung back. He already felt insecure enough on
this high wet platform. Faramir and Frodo looked down. Far below
them they saw the white waters pour into a foaming bowl, and then
swirl darkly about a deep oval basin in the rocks, until they found
their way out again through a narrow gate, and ﬂowed away, fuming
and chattering, into calmer and more level reaches. The moonlight
still slanted down to the fall’s foot and gleamed on the ripples of the
basin. Presently Frodo was aware of a small dark thing on the near
bank, but even as he looked at it, it dived and vanished just beyond
the boil and bubble of the fall, cleaving the black water as neatly as
an arrow or an edgewise stone.
Faramir turned to the man at his side. ‘Now what would you say
that it is, Anborn? A squirrel, or a kingﬁsher? Are there black kingﬁshers in the night-pools of Mirkwood?’
‘’Tis not a bird, whatever else it be,’ answered Anborn. ‘It has
four limbs and dives manwise; a pretty mastery of the craft it shows,
too. What is it at? Seeking a way up behind the Curtain to our
hidings? It seems we are discovered at last. I have my bow here, and
I have posted other archers, nigh as good marksmen as myself, on
either bank. We wait only for your command to shoot, Captain.’
‘Shall we shoot?’ said Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo.
Frodo did not answer for a moment. Then ‘No!’ he said. ‘No! I
beg you not to.’ If Sam had dared, he would have said ‘Yes,’ quicker

THE FORBIDDEN POOL

685

and louder. He could not see, but he guessed well enough from their
words what they were looking at.
‘You know, then, what this thing is?’ said Faramir. ‘Come, now
you have seen, tell me why it should be spared. In all our words
together you have not once spoken of your gangrel companion, and
I let him be for the time. He could wait till he was caught and brought
before me. I sent my keenest huntsmen to seek him, but he slipped
them, and they had no sight of him till now, save Anborn here, once
at dusk yesterevening. But now he has done worse trespass than only
to go coney-snaring in the uplands: he has dared to come to Henneth
Annûn, and his life is forfeit. I marvel at the creature: so secret and
so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before our very window.
Does he think that men sleep without watch all night? Why does he
so?’
‘There are two answers, I think,’ said Frodo. ‘For one thing, he
knows little of Men, and sly though he is, your refuge is so hidden
that perhaps he does not know that Men are concealed here. For
another, I think he is allured here by a mastering desire, stronger
than his caution.’
‘He is lured here, you say?’ said Faramir in a low voice. ‘Can he,
does he then know of your burden?’
‘Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.’
‘He bore it?’ said Faramir, breathing sharply in his wonder. ‘This
matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it?’
‘Maybe. It is precious to him. But I did not speak of that.’
‘What then does the creature seek?’
‘Fish,’ said Frodo. ‘Look!’
They peered down at the dark pool. A little black head appeared
at the far end of the basin, just out of the deep shadow of the rocks.
There was a brief silver glint, and a swirl of tiny ripples. It swam to
the side, and then with marvellous agility a froglike ﬁgure climbed
out of the water and up the bank. At once it sat down and began to
gnaw at the small silver thing that glittered as it turned: the last rays
of the moon were now falling behind the stony wall at the pool’s end.
Faramir laughed softly. ‘Fish!’ he said. ‘It is a less perilous hunger.
Or maybe not: ﬁsh from the pool of Henneth Annûn may cost him
all he has to give.’
‘Now I have him at the arrow-point,’ said Anborn. ‘Shall I not
shoot, Captain? For coming unbidden to this place death is our law.’
‘Wait, Anborn,’ said Faramir. ‘This is a harder matter than it
seems. What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we spare?’
‘The creature is wretched and hungry,’ said Frodo, ‘and unaware
of his danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he would have bidden

686

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

you not to slay him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the
Elves to do so. I do not know clearly why, and of what I guess I
cannot speak openly out here. But this creature is in some way bound
up with my errand. Until you found us and took us, he was my
guide.’
‘Your guide!’ said Faramir. ‘The matter becomes ever stranger. I
would do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let this
sly wanderer go free at his own will from here, to join you later if it
please him, or to be caught by orcs and tell all he knows under threat
of pain. He must be slain or taken. Slain, if he be not taken very
swiftly. But how can this slippery thing of many guises be caught,
save by a feathered shaft?’
‘Let me go down quietly to him,’ said Frodo. ‘You may keep your
bows bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.’
‘Go then and be swift!’ said Faramir. ‘If he comes off alive, he
should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead
Frodo down to the bank, Anborn, and go softly. The thing has a
nose and ears. Give me your bow.’
Anborn grunted and led the way down the winding stair to the
landing, and then up the other stair, until at last they came to a
narrow opening shrouded with thick bushes. Passing silently through,
Frodo found himself on the top of the southern bank above the pool.
It was now dark and the falls were pale and grey, reﬂecting only the
lingering moonlight of the western sky. He could not see Gollum.
He went forward a short way and Anborn came softly behind him.
‘Go on!’ he breathed in Frodo’s ear. ‘Have a care to your right.
If you fall in the pool, then no one but your ﬁshing friend can help
you. And forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you
may not see them.’
Frodo crept forward, using his hands Gollum-like to feel his way
and to steady himself. The rocks were for the most part ﬂat and
smooth but slippery. He halted listening. At ﬁrst he could hear no
sound but the unceasing rush of the fall behind him. Then presently
he heard, not far ahead, a hissing murmur.
‘Fissh, nice ﬁssh. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last,
yes. Now we can eat ﬁsh in peace. No, not in peace, precious. For
Precious is lost; yes, lost. Dirty hobbits, nasty hobbits. Gone and left
us, gollum; and Precious is gone. Only poor Sméagol all alone. No
Precious. Nasty Men, they’ll take it, steal my Precious. Thieves. We
hates them. Fissh, nice ﬁssh. Makes us strong. Makes eyes bright,
ﬁngers tight, yes. Throttle them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if
we gets chances. Nice ﬁssh. Nice ﬁssh!’
So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall, only interrupted
by a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo shivered, listening

THE FORBIDDEN POOL

687

with pity and disgust. He wished it would stop, and that he never
need hear that voice again. Anborn was not far behind. He could
creep back and ask him to get the huntsmen to shoot. They would
probably get close enough, while Gollum was gorging and off his
guard. Only one true shot, and Frodo would be rid of the miserable
voice for ever. But no, Gollum had a claim on him now. The servant
has a claim on the master for service, even service in fear. They would
have foundered in the Dead Marshes but for Gollum. Frodo knew,
too, somehow, quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished it.
‘Sméagol!’ he said softly.
‘Fissh, nice ﬁssh,’ said the voice.
‘Sméagol!’ he said, a little louder. The voice stopped.
‘Sméagol, Master has come to look for you. Master is here. Come,
Sméagol!’ There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of intaken breath.
‘Come, Sméagol!’ said Frodo. ‘We are in danger. Men will kill
you, if they ﬁnd you here. Come quickly, if you wish to escape death.
Come to Master!’
‘No!’ said the voice. ‘Not nice Master. Leaves poor Sméagol and
goes with new friends. Master can wait. Sméagol hasn’t ﬁnished.’
‘There’s no time,’ said Frodo. ‘Bring ﬁsh with you. Come!’
‘No! Must ﬁnish ﬁsh.’
‘Sméagol!’ said Frodo desperately. ‘Precious will be angry. I shall
take Precious, and I shall say: make him swallow the bones and
choke. Never taste ﬁsh again. Come, Precious is waiting!’
There was a sharp hiss. Presently out of the darkness Gollum came
crawling on all fours, like an erring dog called to heel. He had a
half-eaten ﬁsh in his mouth and another in his hand. He came close
to Frodo, almost nose to nose, and sniffed at him. His pale eyes were
shining. Then he took the ﬁsh out of his mouth and stood up.
‘Nice Master!’ he whispered. ‘Nice hobbit, come back to poor
Sméagol. Good Sméagol comes. Now let’s go, go quickly, yes.
Through the trees, while the Faces are dark. Yes, come, let’s go!’
‘Yes, we’ll go soon,’ said Frodo. ‘But not at once. I will go with
you as I promised. I promise again. But not now. You are not safe
yet. I will save you, but you must trust me.’
‘We must trust Master?’ said Gollum doubtfully. ‘Why? Why not
go at once? Where is the other one, the cross rude hobbit? Where is
he?’
‘Away up there,’ said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. ‘I am not
going without him. We must go back to him.’ His heart sank. This
was too much like trickery. He did not really fear that Faramir would
allow Gollum to be killed, but he would probably make him prisoner
and bind him; and certainly what Frodo did would seem a treachery
to the poor treacherous creature. It would probably be impossible

688

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

ever to make him understand or believe that Frodo had saved his life
in the only way he could. What else could he do? – to keep faith, as
near as might be, with both sides. ‘Come!’ he said. ‘Or the Precious
will be angry. We are going back now, up the stream. Go on, go on,
you go in front!’
Gollum crawled along close to the brink for a little way, snufﬂing
and suspicious. Presently he stopped and raised his head. ‘Something’s there!’ he said. ‘Not a hobbit.’ Suddenly he turned back. A
green light was ﬂickering in his bulging eyes. ‘Masster, masster!’ he
hissed. ‘Wicked! Tricksy! False!’ He spat and stretched out his long
arms with white snapping ﬁngers.
At that moment the great black shape of Anborn loomed up behind
him and came down on him. A large strong hand took him in the
nape of the neck and pinned him. He twisted round like lightning,
all wet and slimy as he was, wriggling like an eel, biting and scratching
like a cat. But two more men came up out of the shadows.
‘Hold still!’ said one. ‘Or we’ll stick you as full of pins as a hedgehog. Hold still!’
Gollum went limp, and began to whine and weep. They tied him,
none too gently.
‘Easy, easy!’ said Frodo. ‘He has no strength to match you. Don’t
hurt him, if you can help it. He’ll be quieter, if you don’t. Sméagol!
They won’t hurt you. I’ll go with you, and you shall come to no
harm. Not unless they kill me too. Trust Master!’
Gollum turned and spat at him. The men picked him up, put a
hood over his eyes, and carried him off.
Frodo followed them, feeling very wretched. They went through
the opening behind the bushes, and back, down the stairs and passages, into the cave. Two or three torches had been lit. Men were
stirring. Sam was there, and he gave a queer look at the limp bundle
that the men carried. ‘Got him?’ he said to Frodo.
‘Yes. Well no, I didn’t get him. He came to me, because he trusted
me at ﬁrst, I’m afraid. I did not want him tied up like this. I hope it
will be all right; but I hate the whole business.’
‘So do I,’ said Sam. ‘And nothing will ever be all right where that
piece of misery is.’
A man came and beckoned to the hobbits, and took them to the
recess at the back of the cave. Faramir was sitting there in his chair,
and the lamp had been rekindled in its niche above his head. He
signed to them to sit down on the stools beside him. ‘Bring wine for
the guests,’ he said. ‘And bring the prisoner to me.’
The wine was brought, and then Anborn came carrying Gollum.
He removed the cover from Gollum’s head and set him on his feet,
standing behind him to support him. Gollum blinked, hooding the

THE FORBIDDEN POOL

689

malice of his eyes with their heavy pale lids. A very miserable creature
he looked, dripping and dank, smelling of ﬁsh (he still clutched one
in his hand); his sparse locks were hanging like rank weed over his
bony brows, his nose was snivelling.
‘Loose us! Loose us!’ he said. ‘The cord hurts us, yes it does, it
hurts us, and we’ve done nothing.’
‘Nothing?’ said Faramir, looking at the wretched creature with a
keen glance, but without any expression in his face either of anger,
or pity, or wonder. ‘Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy
of binding or of worse punishment? However, that is not for me to
judge, happily. But tonight you have come where it is death to come.
The ﬁsh of this pool are dearly bought.’
Gollum dropped the ﬁsh from his hand. ‘Don’t want ﬁsh,’ he said.
‘The price is not set on the ﬁsh,’ said Faramir. ‘Only to come here
and look on the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared you
so far at the prayer of Frodo here, who says that of him at least you
have deserved some thanks. But you must also satisfy me. What is
your name? Whence do you come? And whither do you go? What
is your business?’
‘We are lost, lost,’ said Gollum. ‘No name, no business, no Precious, nothing. Only empty. Only hungry; yes, we are hungry. A few
little ﬁshes, nasty bony little ﬁshes, for a poor creature, and they say
death. So wise they are; so just, so very just.’
‘Not very wise,’ said Faramir. ‘But just: yes perhaps, as just as
our little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo!’ Faramir took a small
nail-knife from his belt and handed it to Frodo. Gollum misunderstanding the gesture, squealed and fell down.
‘Now, Sméagol!’ said Frodo. ‘You must trust me. I will not desert
you. Answer truthfully, if you can. It will do you good not harm.’
He cut the cords on Gollum’s wrists and ankles and raised him to
his feet.
‘Come hither!’ said Faramir. ‘Look at me! Do you know the name
of this place? Have you been here before?’
Slowly Gollum raised his eyes and looked unwillingly into Faramir’s. All light went out of them, and they stared bleak and pale for
a moment into the clear unwavering eyes of the man of Gondor.
There was a still silence. Then Gollum dropped his head and shrank
down, until he was squatting on the ﬂoor, shivering. ‘We doesn’t
know and we doesn’t want to know,’ he whimpered. ‘Never came
here; never come again.’
‘There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and
dark rooms behind them,’ said Faramir. ‘But in this I judge that you
speak the truth. It is well for you. What oath will you swear never to
return; and never to lead any living creature hither by word or sign?’

690

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Master knows,’ said Gollum with a sidelong glance at Frodo.
‘Yes, he knows. We will promise Master, if he saves us. We’ll promise
to It, yes.’ He crawled to Frodo’s feet. ‘Save us, nice Master!’ he
whined. ‘Sméagol promises to Precious, promises faithfully. Never
come again, never speak, no never! No, precious, no!’
‘Are you satisﬁed?’ said Faramir.
‘Yes,’ said Frodo. ‘At least, you must either accept this promise
or carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if
he came to me, he should not be harmed. And I would not be proved
faithless.’
Faramir sat for a moment in thought. ‘Very good,’ he said at last.
‘I surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him
declare what he will do with you!’
‘But, Lord Faramir,’ said Frodo bowing, ‘you have not yet declared
your will concerning the said Frodo, and until that is made known,
he cannot shape his plans for himself or his companions. Your judgement was postponed until the morning; but that is now at hand.’
‘Then I will declare my doom,’ said Faramir. ‘As for you, Frodo,
in so far as lies in me under higher authority, I declare you free in
the realm of Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only
that neither you nor any that go with you have leave to come to this
place unbidden. This doom shall stand for a year and a day, and
then cease, unless you shall before that term come to Minas Tirith
and present yourself to the Lord and Steward of the City. Then I
will entreat him to conﬁrm what I have done and to make it lifelong.
In the meantime, whomsoever you take under your protection shall
be under my protection and under the shield of Gondor. Are you
answered?’
Frodo bowed low. ‘I am answered,’ he said, ‘and I place myself
at your service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.’
‘It is of great worth,’ said Faramir. ‘And now, do you take this
creature, this Sméagol, under your protection?’
‘I do take Sméagol under my protection,’ said Frodo. Sam sighed
audibly; and not at the courtesies, of which, as any hobbit would, he
thoroughly approved. Indeed in the Shire such a matter would have
required a great many more words and bows.
‘Then I say to you,’ said Faramir, turning to Gollum, ‘you are
under doom of death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe
for our part. Yet if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray
without him, the doom shall fall. And may death ﬁnd you swiftly,
within Gondor or without, if you do not well serve him. Now answer
me: whither would you go? You were his guide, he says. Whither
were you leading him?’ Gollum made no reply.

THE FORBIDDEN POOL

691

‘This I will not have secret,’ said Faramir. ‘Answer me, or I will
reverse my judgement!’ Still Gollum did not answer.
‘I will answer for him,’ said Frodo. ‘He brought me to the Black
Gate, as I asked; but it was impassable.’
‘There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,’ said Faramir.
‘Seeing this, we turned aside and came by the Southward road,’
Frodo continued; ‘for he said that there is, or there may be, a path
near to Minas Ithil.’
‘Minas Morgul,’ said Faramir.
‘I do not know clearly,’ said Frodo; ‘but the path climbs, I think,
up into the mountains on the northern side of that vale where the
old city stands. It goes up to a high cleft and so down to – that which
is beyond.’
‘Do you know the name of that high pass?’ said Faramir.
‘No,’ said Frodo.
‘It is called Cirith Ungol.’ Gollum hissed sharply and began muttering to himself. ‘Is not that its name?’ said Faramir turning to him.
‘No!’ said Gollum, and then he squealed, as if something had
stabbed him. ‘Yes, yes, we heard the name once. But what does the
name matter to us? Master says he must get in. So we must try some
way. There is no other way to try, no.’
‘No other way?’ said Faramir. ‘How do you know that? And who
has explored all the conﬁnes of that dark realm?’ He looked long and
thoughtfully at Gollum. Presently he spoke again. ‘Take this creature
away, Anborn. Treat him gently, but watch him. And do not you,
Sméagol, try to dive into the falls. The rocks have such teeth there
as would slay you before your time. Leave us now and take your
ﬁsh!’
Anborn went out and Gollum went cringing before him. The
curtain was drawn across the recess.
‘Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,’ said Faramir. ‘I do
not think you should go with this creature. It is wicked.’
‘No, not altogether wicked,’ said Frodo.
‘Not wholly, perhaps,’ said Faramir; ‘but malice eats it like a
canker, and the evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you
will part with him, I will give him safe-conduct and guidance to any
point on the borders of Gondor that he may name.’
‘He would not take it,’ said Frodo. ‘He would follow after me as
he long has done. And I have promised many times to take him under
my protection and to go where he led. You would not ask me to
break faith with him?’
‘No,’ said Faramir. ‘But my heart would. For it seems less evil to
counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially

692

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

if one sees a friend bound unwitting to his own harm. But no – if he
will go with you, you must now endure him. But I do not think you
are holden to go to Cirith Ungol, of which he has told you less than
he knows. That much I perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to
Cirith Ungol!’
‘Where then shall I go?’ said Frodo. ‘Back to the Black Gate and
deliver myself up to the guard? What do you know against this place
that makes its name so dreadful?’
‘Nothing certain,’ said Faramir. ‘We of Gondor do not ever pass
east of the Road in these days, and none of us younger men has ever
done so, nor has any of us set foot upon the Mountains of Shadow.
Of them we know only old report and the rumour of bygone days.
But there is some dark terror that dwells in the passes above Minas
Morgul. If Cirith Ungol is named, old men and masters of lore will
blanch and fall silent.
‘The valley of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago, and
it was a menace and a dread while the banished Enemy dwelt yet far
away, and Ithilien was still for the most part in our keeping. As you
know, that city was once a strong place, proud and fair, Minas Ithil,
the twin sister of our own city. But it was taken by fell men whom
the Enemy in his ﬁrst strength had dominated, and who wandered
homeless and masterless after his fall. It is said that their lords were
men of Númenor who had fallen into dark wickedness; to them the
Enemy had given rings of power, and he had devoured them: living
ghosts they were become, terrible and evil. After his going they took
Minas Ithil and dwelt there, and they ﬁlled it, and all the valley about,
with decay: it seemed empty and was not so, for a shapeless fear
lived within the ruined walls. Nine Lords there were, and after the
return of their Master, which they aided and prepared in secret, they
grew strong again. Then the Nine Riders issued forth from the gates
of horror, and we could not withstand them. Do not approach their
citadel. You will be espied. It is a place of sleepless malice, full of
lidless eyes. Do not go that way!’
‘But where else will you direct me?’ said Frodo. ‘You cannot
yourself, you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over them. But over
the mountains I am bound, by solemn undertaking to the Council, to
ﬁnd a way or perish in the seeking. And if I turn back, refusing the
road in its bitter end, where then shall I go among Elves or Men?
Would you have me come to Gondor with this Thing, the Thing that
drove your brother mad with desire? What spell would it work in
Minas Tirith? Shall there be two cities of Minas Morgul, grinning at
each other across a dead land ﬁlled with rottenness?’
‘I would not have it so,’ said Faramir.
‘Then what would you have me do?’

THE FORBIDDEN POOL

693

‘I know not. Only I would not have you go to death or to torment.
And I do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way.’
‘Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can ﬁnd. And
there is no time for long searching,’ said Frodo.
‘It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,’ said Faramir. ‘But at
the least, remember my warning: beware of this guide, Sméagol. He
has done murder before now. I read it in him.’ He sighed.
‘Well, so we meet and part, Frodo son of Drogo. You have no
need of soft words: I do not hope to see you again on any other day
under this Sun. But you shall go now with my blessing upon you,
and upon all your people. Rest a little while food is prepared for you.
‘I would gladly learn how this creeping Sméagol became possessed
of the Thing of which we speak, and how he lost it, but I will not
trouble you now. If ever beyond hope you return to the lands of the
living and we re-tell our tales, sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing
at old grief, you shall tell me then. Until that time, or some other
time beyond the vision of the Seeing-stones of Númenor, farewell!’
He rose and bowed low to Frodo, and drawing the curtain passed
out into the cave.

Chapter 7
JOURNEY TO THE
CROSS-ROADS
Frodo and Sam returned to their beds and lay there in silence resting
for a little, while men bestirred themselves and the business of the
day began. After a while water was brought to them, and then they
were led to a table where food was set for three. Faramir broke his
fast with them. He had not slept since the battle on the day before,
yet he did not look weary.
When they had ﬁnished they stood up. ‘May no hunger trouble
you on the road,’ said Faramir. ‘You have little provision, but some
small store of food ﬁt for travellers I have ordered to be stowed in
your packs. You will have no lack of water as you walk in Ithilien,
but do not drink of any stream that ﬂows from Imlad Morgul, the
Valley of Living Death. This also I must tell you. My scouts and
watchers have all returned, even some that have crept within sight
of the Morannon. They all ﬁnd a strange thing. The land is empty.
Nothing is on the road, and no sound of foot, or horn, or bowstring
is anywhere to be heard. A waiting silence broods above the Nameless
Land. I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly
to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may!
If you are ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.’
The hobbits’ packs were brought to them (a little heavier than
they had been), and also two stout staves of polished wood, shod
with iron, and with carven heads through which ran plaited leathern
thongs.
‘I have no ﬁtting gifts to give you at our parting,’ said Faramir;
‘but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or
climb in the wild. The men of the White Mountains use them; though
these have been cut down to your height and newly shod. They are
made of the fair tree lebethron, beloved of the woodwrights of Gondor,
and a virtue has been set upon them of ﬁnding and returning. May
that virtue not wholly fail under the Shadow into which you go!’
The hobbits bowed low. ‘Most gracious host,’ said Frodo, ‘it was
said to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should ﬁnd friendship upon
the way, secret and unlooked for. Certainly I looked for no such
friendship as you have shown. To have found it turns evil to great
good.’
*
*
*

JOURNEY TO THE CROSS-ROADS

695

Now they made ready to depart. Gollum was brought out of some
corner or hiding-hole, and he seemed better pleased with himself
than he had been, though he kept close to Frodo and avoided the
glance of Faramir.
‘Your guide must be blindfolded,’ said Faramir, ‘but you and your
servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.’
Gollum squealed, and squirmed, and clutched at Frodo, when
they came to bind his eyes; and Frodo said: ‘Blindfold us all three,
and cover up my eyes ﬁrst, and then perhaps he will see that no harm
is meant.’ This was done, and they were led from the cave of Henneth
Annûn. After they had passed the passages and stairs they felt the
cool morning air, fresh and sweet, about them. Still blind they went
on for some little time, up and then gently down. At last the voice
of Faramir ordered them to be uncovered.
They stood under the boughs of the woods again. No noise of the
falls could be heard, for a long southward slope lay now between
them and the ravine in which the stream ﬂowed. To the west they
could see light through the trees, as if the world came there to a
sudden end, at a brink looking out only on to sky.
‘Here is the last parting of our ways,’ said Faramir. ‘If you take
my counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go straight on, for thus
you will have the cover of the woodland for many miles. On your
west is an edge where the land falls into the great vales, sometimes
suddenly and sheer, sometimes in long hillsides. Keep near to this
edge and the skirts of the forest. In the beginning of your journey
you may walk under daylight, I think. The land dreams in a false
peace, and for a while all evil is withdrawn. Fare you well, while you
may!’
He embraced the hobbits then, after the manner of his people,
stooping, and placing his hands upon their shoulders, and kissing
their foreheads. ‘Go with the good will of all good men!’ he said.
They bowed to the ground. Then he turned and without looking
back he left them and went to his two guards that stood at a little
distance away. They marvelled to see with what speed these greenclad men now moved, vanishing almost in the twinkling of an eye.
The forest where Faramir had stood seemed empty and drear, as if
a dream had passed.
Frodo sighed and turned back southward. As if to mark his disregard of all such courtesy, Gollum was scrabbling in the mould at the
foot of a tree. ‘Hungry again already?’ thought Sam. ‘Well, now for
it again!’
‘Have they gone at last?’ said Gollum. ‘Nassty wicked Men!
Sméagol’s neck still hurts him, yes it does. Let’s go!’

696

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Yes, let us go,’ said Frodo. ‘But if you can only speak ill of those
who showed you mercy, keep silent!’
‘Nice Master!’ said Gollum. ‘Sméagol was only joking. Always
forgives, he does, yes, yes, even nice Master’s little trickses. Oh yes,
nice Master, nice Sméagol!’
Frodo and Sam did not answer. Hoisting their packs and taking
their staves in hand, they passed on into the woods of Ithilien.
Twice that day they rested and took a little of the food provided
by Faramir: dried fruits and salted meat, enough for many days; and
bread enough to last while it was still fresh. Gollum ate nothing.
The sun rose and passed overhead unseen, and began to sink, and
the light through the trees to the west grew golden; and always they
walked in cool green shadow, and all about them was silence. The
birds seemed all to have ﬂown away or to have fallen dumb.
Darkness came early to the silent woods, and before the fall of
night they halted, weary, for they had walked seven leagues or more
from Henneth Annûn. Frodo lay and slept away the night on the
deep mould beneath an ancient tree. Sam beside him was more
uneasy: he woke many times, but there was never a sign of Gollum,
who had slipped off as soon as the others had settled to rest. Whether
he had slept by himself in some hole nearby, or had wandered restlessly prowling through the night, he did not say; but he returned
with the ﬁrst glimmer of light, and roused his companions.
‘Must get up, yes they must!’ he said. ‘Long ways to go still, south
and east. Hobbits must make haste!’
That day passed much as the day before had gone, except that
the silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavy, and it began to be
stiﬂing under the trees. It felt as if thunder was brewing. Gollum
often paused, snifﬁng the air, and then he would mutter to himself
and urge them to greater speed.
As the third stage of their day’s march drew on and afternoon
waned, the forest opened out, and the trees became larger and more
scattered. Great ilexes of huge girth stood dark and solemn in wide
glades with here and there among them hoary ash-trees, and giant
oaks just putting out their brown-green buds. About them lay long
launds of green grass dappled with celandine and anemones, white
and blue, now folded for sleep; and there were acres populous with
the leaves of woodland hyacinths: already their sleek bell-stems were
thrusting through the mould. No living creature, beast or bird, was
to be seen, but in these open places Gollum grew afraid, and they
walked now with caution, ﬂitting from one long shadow to another.
Light was fading fast when they came to the forest-end. There
they sat under an old gnarled oak that sent its roots twisting like

JOURNEY TO THE CROSS-ROADS

697

snakes down a steep crumbling bank. A deep dim valley lay before
them. On its further side the woods gathered again, blue and grey
under the sullen evening, and marched on southwards. To the right
the Mountains of Gondor glowed, remote in the West, under a ﬁreﬂecked sky. To the left lay darkness: the towering walls of Mordor;
and out of that darkness the long valley came, falling steeply in an
ever-widening trough towards the Anduin. At its bottom ran a
hurrying stream: Frodo could hear its stony voice coming up through
the silence; and beside it on the hither side a road went winding
down like a pale ribbon, down into chill grey mists that no gleam of
sunset touched. There it seemed to Frodo that he descried far off,
ﬂoating as it were on a shadowy sea, the high dim tops and broken
pinnacles of old towers forlorn and dark.
He turned to Gollum. ‘Do you know where we are?’ he said.
‘Yes, Master. Dangerous places. This is the road from the Tower
of the Moon, Master, down to the ruined city by the shores of the
River. The ruined city, yes, very nasty place, full of enemies. We
shouldn’t have taken Men’s advice. Hobbits have come a long way
out of the path. Must go east now, away up there.’ He waved his
skinny arm towards the darkling mountains. ‘And we can’t use this
road. Oh no! Cruel peoples come this way, down from the Tower.’
Frodo looked down on to the road. At any rate nothing was moving
on it now. It appeared lonely and forsaken, running down to empty
ruins in the mist. But there was an evil feeling in the air, as if things
might indeed be passing up and down that eyes could not see. Frodo
shuddered as he looked again at the distant pinnacles now dwindling
into night, and the sound of the water seemed cold and cruel: the
voice of Morgulduin, the polluted stream that ﬂowed from the Valley
of the Wraiths.
‘What shall we do?’ he said. ‘We have walked long and far. Shall
we look for some place in the woods behind where we can lie hidden?’
‘No good hiding in the dark,’ said Gollum. ‘It’s in day that hobbits
must hide now, yes in day.’
‘Oh come!’ said Sam. ‘We must rest for a bit, even if we get up
again in the middle of the night. There’ll still be hours of dark then,
time enough for you to take us a long march, if you know the way.’
Gollum reluctantly agreed to this, and he turned back towards the
trees, working eastward for a while along the straggling edges of the
wood. He would not rest on the ground so near the evil road, and
after some debate they all climbed up into the crotch of a large
holm-oak, whose thick branches springing together from the trunk
made a good hiding-place and a fairly comfortable refuge. Night fell
and it grew altogether dark under the canopy of the tree. Frodo and
Sam drank a little water and ate some bread and dried fruit, but

698

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Gollum at once curled up and went to sleep. The hobbits did not
shut their eyes.
It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up:
suddenly they were aware of his pale eyes unlidded gleaming at them.
He listened and sniffed, which seemed, as they had noticed before,
his usual method of discovering the time of night.
‘Are we rested? Have we had beautiful sleep?’ he said. ‘Let’s go!’
‘We aren’t, and we haven’t,’ growled Sam. ‘But we’ll go if we
must.’
Gollum dropped at once from the branches of the tree on to all
fours, and the hobbits followed more slowly.
As soon as they were down they went on again with Gollum leading, eastwards, up the dark sloping land. They could see little, for
the night was now so deep that they were hardly aware of the stems
of trees before they stumbled against them. The ground became more
broken and walking was more difﬁcult, but Gollum seemed in no
way troubled. He led them through thickets and wastes of brambles;
sometimes round the lip of a deep cleft or dark pit, sometimes down
into black bush-shrouded hollows and out again; but if ever they
went a little downward, always the further slope was longer and
steeper. They were climbing steadily. At their ﬁrst halt they looked
back, and they could dimly perceive the roofs of the forest they had
left behind, lying like a vast dense shadow, a darker night under the
dark blank sky. There seemed to be a great blackness looming slowly
out of the East, eating up the faint blurred stars. Later the sinking
moon escaped from the pursuing cloud, but it was ringed all about
with a sickly yellow glare.
At last Gollum turned to the hobbits. ‘Day soon,’ he said. ‘Hobbits
must hurry. Not safe to stay in the open in these places. Make haste!’
He quickened his pace, and they followed him wearily. Soon they
began to climb up on to a great hog-back of land. For the most part
it was covered with a thick growth of gorse and whortleberry, and
low tough thorns, though here and there clearings opened, the scars
of recent ﬁres. The gorse-bushes became more frequent as they got
nearer the top; very old and tall they were, gaunt and leggy below but
thick above, and already putting out yellow ﬂowers that glimmered in
the gloom and gave a faint sweet scent. So tall were the spiny thickets
that the hobbits could walk upright under them, passing through
long dry aisles carpeted with a deep prickly mould.
On the further edge of this broad hill-back they stayed their march
and crawled for hiding underneath a tangled knot of thorns. Their
twisted boughs, stooping to the ground, were overridden by a clambering maze of old briars. Deep inside there was a hollow hall, raftered

JOURNEY TO THE CROSS-ROADS

699

with dead branch and bramble, and roofed with the ﬁrst leaves and
shoots of spring. There they lay for a while, too tired yet to eat; and
peering out through the holes in the covert they watched for the slow
growth of day.
But no day came, only a dead brown twilight. In the East there
was a dull red glare under the lowering cloud: it was not the red of
dawn. Across the tumbled lands between, the mountains of the Ephel
Dúath frowned at them, black and shapeless below where night lay
thick and did not pass away, above with jagged tops and edges outlined hard and menacing against the ﬁery glow. Away to their right
a great shoulder of the mountains stood out, dark and black amid
the shadows, thrusting westward.
‘Which way do we go from here?’ asked Frodo. ‘Is that the opening
of – of the Morgul Valley, away over there beyond that black mass?’
‘Need we think about it yet?’ said Sam. ‘Surely we’re not going
to move any more today, if day it is?’
‘Perhaps not, perhaps not,’ said Gollum. ‘But we must go soon,
to the Cross-roads. Yes, to the Cross-roads. That’s the way over
there, yes, Master.’
The red glare over Mordor died away. The twilight deepened as
great vapours rose in the East and crawled above them. Frodo and
Sam took a little food and then lay down, but Gollum was restless.
He would not eat any of their food, but he drank a little water and
then crawled about under the bushes, snifﬁng and muttering. Then
suddenly he disappeared.
‘Off hunting, I suppose,’ said Sam and yawned. It was his turn to
sleep ﬁrst, and he was soon deep in a dream. He thought he was
back in the Bag End garden looking for something; but he had a
heavy pack on his back, which made him stoop. It all seemed very
weedy and rank somehow, and thorns and bracken were invading
the beds down near the bottom hedge.
‘A job of work for me, I can see; but I’m so tired,’ he kept on
saying. Presently he remembered what he was looking for. ‘My pipe!’
he said, and with that he woke up.
‘Silly!’ he said to himself, as he opened his eyes and wondered
why he was lying down under the hedge. ‘It’s in your pack all the
time!’ Then he realized, ﬁrst that the pipe might be in his pack but
he had no leaf, and next that he was hundreds of miles from Bag
End. He sat up. It seemed to be almost dark. Why had his master
let him sleep on out of turn, right on till evening?
‘Haven’t you had no sleep, Mr. Frodo?’ he said. ‘What’s the time?
Seems to be getting late!’
‘No it isn’t,’ said Frodo. ‘But the day is getting darker instead of

700

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

lighter: darker and darker. As far as I can tell, it isn’t midday yet,
and you’ve only slept for about three hours.’
‘I wonder what’s up,’ said Sam. ‘Is there a storm coming? If so
it’s going to be the worst there ever was. We shall wish we were down
a deep hole, not just stuck under a hedge.’ He listened. ‘What’s that?
Thunder, or drums, or what is it?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Frodo. ‘It’s been going on for a good while
now. Sometimes the ground seems to tremble, sometimes it seems
to be the heavy air throbbing in your ears.’
Sam looked round. ‘Where’s Gollum?’ he said. ‘Hasn’t he come
back yet?’
‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘There’s not been a sign or sound of him.’
‘Well, I can’t abide him,’ said Sam. ‘In fact, I’ve never taken
anything on a journey that I’d have been less sorry to lose on the
way. But it would be just like him, after coming all these miles, to
go and get lost now, just when we shall need him most – that is, if
he’s ever going to be any use, which I doubt.’
‘You forget the Marshes,’ said Frodo. ‘I hope nothing has happened to him.’
‘And I hope he’s up to no tricks. And anyway I hope he doesn’t
fall into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we shall
soon be in for trouble.’
At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again,
louder now and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their
feet. ‘I think we are in for trouble anyhow,’ said Frodo. ‘I’m afraid
our journey is drawing to an end.’
‘Maybe,’ said Sam; ‘but where there’s life there’s hope, as my gaffer
used to say; and need of vittles, as he mostways used to add. You have
a bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.’
The afternoon, as Sam supposed it must be called, wore on. Looking out from the covert he could see only a dun, shadowless world,
fading slowly into a featureless, colourless gloom. It felt stiﬂing but
not warm. Frodo slept unquietly, turning and tossing, and sometimes
murmuring. Twice Sam thought he heard him speaking Gandalf ’s
name. The time seemed to drag interminably. Suddenly Sam heard
a hiss behind him, and there was Gollum on all fours, peering at
them with gleaming eyes.
‘Wake up, wake up! Wake up, sleepies!’ he whispered. ‘Wake up!
No time to lose. We must go, yes, we must go at once. No time to
lose!’
Sam stared at him suspiciously: he seemed frightened or excited.
‘Go now? What’s your little game? It isn’t time yet. It can’t be tea-time
even, leastways not in decent places where there is tea-time.’

JOURNEY TO THE CROSS-ROADS

701

‘Silly!’ hissed Gollum. ‘We’re not in decent places. Time’s running
short, yes, running fast. No time to lose. We must go. Wake up,
Master, wake up!’ He clawed at Frodo; and Frodo, startled out of
sleep, sat up suddenly and seized him by the arm. Gollum tore himself
loose and backed away.
‘They mustn’t be silly,’ he hissed. ‘We must go. No time to lose!’
And nothing more could they get out of him. Where he had been,
and what he thought was brewing to make him in such a hurry, he
would not say. Sam was ﬁlled with deep suspicion, and showed it;
but Frodo gave no sign of what was passing in his mind. He sighed,
hoisted his pack, and prepared to go out into the ever-gathering
darkness.
Very stealthily Gollum led them down the hillside, keeping under
cover wherever it was possible, and running, almost bent to the
ground, across any open space; but the light was now so dim that
even a keen-eyed beast of the wild could scarcely have seen the
hobbits, hooded, in their grey cloaks, nor heard them, walking as
warily as the little people can. Without the crack of a twig or the
rustle of a leaf they passed and vanished.
For about an hour they went on, silently, in single ﬁle, oppressed
by the gloom and by the absolute stillness of the land, broken only
now and again by the faint rumbling as of thunder far away or drumbeats in some hollow of the hills. Down from their hiding-place they
went, and then turning south they steered as straight a course as
Gollum could ﬁnd across a long broken slope that leaned up towards
the mountains. Presently, not far ahead, looming up like a black wall,
they saw a belt of trees. As they drew nearer they became aware that
these were of vast size, very ancient it seemed, and still towering
high, though their tops were gaunt and broken, as if tempest and
lightning-blast had swept across them, but had failed to kill them or
to shake their fathomless roots.
‘The Cross-roads, yes,’ whispered Gollum, the ﬁrst words that
had been spoken since they left their hiding-place. ‘We must go that
way.’ Turning eastward now, he led them up the slope; and then
suddenly there it was before them: the Southward Road, winding its
way about the outer feet of the mountains, until presently it plunged
into the great ring of trees.
‘This is the only way,’ whispered Gollum. ‘No paths beyond the
road. No paths. We must go to the Cross-roads. But make haste! Be
silent!’
As furtively as scouts within the campment of their enemies, they
crept down on to the road, and stole along its westward edge under
the stony bank, grey as the stones themselves, and soft-footed as

702

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

hunting cats. At length they reached the trees, and found that they
stood in a great rooﬂess ring, open in the middle to the sombre sky;
and the spaces between their immense boles were like the great dark
arches of some ruined hall. In the very centre four ways met. Behind
them lay the road to the Morannon; before them it ran out again
upon its long journey south; to their right the road from old Osgiliath
came climbing up, and crossing, passed out eastward into darkness:
the fourth way, the road they were to take.
Standing there for a moment ﬁlled with dread Frodo became aware
that a light was shining; he saw it glowing on Sam’s face beside him.
Turning towards it, he saw, beyond an arch of boughs, the road to
Osgiliath running almost as straight as a stretched ribbon down,
down, into the West. There, far away, beyond sad Gondor now
overwhelmed in shade, the Sun was sinking, ﬁnding at last the hem
of the great slow-rolling pall of cloud, and falling in an ominous ﬁre
towards the yet unsullied Sea. The brief glow fell upon a huge sitting
ﬁgure, still and solemn as the great stone kings of Argonath. The
years had gnawed it, and violent hands had maimed it. Its head was
gone, and in its place was set in mockery a round rough-hewn stone,
rudely painted by savage hands in the likeness of a grinning face with
one large red eye in the midst of its forehead. Upon its knees and
mighty chair, and all about the pedestal, were idle scrawls mixed with
the foul symbols that the maggot-folk of Mordor used.
Suddenly, caught by the level beams, Frodo saw the old king’s
head: it was lying rolled away by the roadside. ‘Look, Sam!’ he cried,
startled into speech. ‘Look! The king has got a crown again!’
The eyes were hollow and the carven beard was broken, but about
the high stern forehead there was a coronal of silver and gold. A
trailing plant with ﬂowers like small white stars had bound itself
across the brows as if in reverence for the fallen king, and in the
crevices of his stony hair yellow stonecrop gleamed.
‘They cannot conquer for ever!’ said Frodo. And then suddenly
the brief glimpse was gone. The Sun dipped and vanished, and as if
at the shuttering of a lamp, black night fell.

Chapter 8
THE STAIRS OF CIRITH UNGOL
Gollum was tugging at Frodo’s cloak and hissing with fear and
impatience. ‘We must go,’ he said. ‘We mustn’t stand here. Make
haste!’
Reluctantly Frodo turned his back on the West and followed as
his guide led him, out into the darkness of the East. They left the
ring of trees and crept along the road towards the mountains. This
road, too, ran straight for a while, but soon it began to bend away
southwards, until it came right under the great shoulder of rock that
they had seen from the distance. Black and forbidding it loomed
above them, darker than the dark sky behind. Crawling under its
shadow the road went on, and rounding it sprang east again and
began to climb steeply.
Frodo and Sam were plodding along with heavy hearts, no longer
able to care greatly about their peril. Frodo’s head was bowed; his
burden was dragging him down again. As soon as the great Crossroads had been passed, the weight of it, almost forgotten in Ithilien,
had begun to grow once more. Now, feeling the way become steep
before his feet, he looked wearily up; and then he saw it, even as
Gollum had said that he would: the city of the Ringwraiths. He
cowered against the stony bank.
A long-tilted valley, a deep gulf of shadow, ran back far into the
mountains. Upon the further side, some way within the valley’s arms,
high on a rocky seat upon the black knees of the Ephel Dúath, stood
the walls and tower of Minas Morgul. All was dark about it, earth and
sky, but it was lit with light. Not the imprisoned moonlight welling
through the marble walls of Minas Ithil long ago, Tower of the Moon,
fair and radiant in the hollow of the hills. Paler indeed than the moon
ailing in some slow eclipse was the light of it now, wavering and
blowing like a noisome exhalation of decay, a corpse-light, a light that
illuminated nothing. In the walls and tower windows showed, like
countless black holes looking inward into emptiness; but the topmost
course of the tower revolved slowly, ﬁrst one way and then another,
a huge ghostly head leering into the night. For a moment the three
companions stood there, shrinking, staring up with unwilling eyes.
Gollum was the ﬁrst to recover. Again he pulled at their cloaks urgently,
but he spoke no word. Almost he dragged them forward. Every step
was reluctant, and time seemed to slow its pace, so that between the
raising of a foot and the setting of it down minutes of loathing passed.

704

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

So they came slowly to the white bridge. Here the road, gleaming
faintly, passed over the stream in the midst of the valley, and went
on, winding deviously up towards the city’s gate: a black mouth
opening in the outer circle of the northward walls. Wide ﬂats lay on
either bank, shadowy meads ﬁlled with pale white ﬂowers. Luminous
these were too, beautiful and yet horrible of shape, like the demented
forms in an uneasy dream; and they gave forth a faint sickening
charnel-smell; an odour of rottenness ﬁlled the air. From mead to
mead the bridge sprang. Figures stood there at its head, carven with
cunning in forms human and bestial, but all corrupt and loathsome.
The water ﬂowing beneath was silent, and it steamed, but the vapour
that rose from it, curling and twisting about the bridge, was deadly
cold. Frodo felt his senses reeling and his mind darkening. Then
suddenly, as if some force were at work other than his own will, he
began to hurry, tottering forward, his groping hands held out, his
head lolling from side to side. Both Sam and Gollum ran after him.
Sam caught his master in his arms, as he stumbled and almost fell,
right on the threshold of the bridge.
‘Not that way! No, not that way!’ whispered Gollum, but the
breath between his teeth seemed to tear the heavy stillness like a
whistle, and he cowered to the ground in terror.
‘Hold up, Mr. Frodo!’ muttered Sam in Frodo’s ear. ‘Come back!
Not that way. Gollum says not, and for once I agree with him.’
Frodo passed his hand over his brow and wrenched his eyes away
from the city on the hill. The luminous tower fascinated him, and
he fought the desire that was on him to run up the gleaming road
towards its gate. At last with an effort he turned back, and as he did
so, he felt the Ring resisting him, dragging at the chain about his
neck; and his eyes too, as he looked away, seemed for the moment
to have been blinded. The darkness before him was impenetrable.
Gollum, crawling on the ground like a frightened animal, was
already vanishing into the gloom. Sam, supporting and guiding his
stumbling master, followed after him as quickly as he could. Not far
from the near bank of the stream there was a gap in the stone-wall
beside the road. Through this they passed, and Sam saw that they
were on a narrow path that gleamed faintly at ﬁrst, as the main road
did, until climbing above the meads of deadly ﬂowers it faded and
went dark, winding its crooked way up into the northern sides of the
valley.
Along this path the hobbits trudged, side by side, unable to see
Gollum in front of them, except when he turned back to beckon
them on. Then his eyes shone with a green-white light, reﬂecting the
noisome Morgul-sheen perhaps, or kindled by some answering mood
within. Of that deadly gleam and of the dark eyeholes Frodo and

THE STAIRS OF CIRITH UNGOL

705

Sam were always conscious, ever glancing fearfully over their shoulders, and ever dragging their eyes back to ﬁnd the darkening path.
Slowly they laboured on. As they rose above the stench and vapours
of the poisonous stream their breath became easier and their heads
clearer; but now their limbs were deadly tired, as if they had walked
all night under a burden, or had been swimming long against a heavy
tide of water. At last they could go no further without a halt.
Frodo stopped and sat down on a stone. They had now climbed
up to the top of a great hump of bare rock. Ahead of them there was
a bay in the valley-side, and round the head of this the path went
on, no more than a wide ledge with a chasm on the right; across the
sheer southward face of the mountain it crawled upwards, until it
disappeared into the blackness above.
‘I must rest a while, Sam,’ whispered Frodo. ‘It’s heavy on me,
Sam lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry it? Anyway I must
rest before we venture on to that.’ He pointed to the narrow way
ahead.
‘Sssh! ssh!’ hissed Gollum hurrying back to them. ‘Sssh!’ His
ﬁngers were on his lips and he shook his head urgently. Tugging at
Frodo’s sleeve, he pointed towards the path; but Frodo would not
move.
‘Not yet,’ he said, ‘not yet.’ Weariness and more than weariness
oppressed him; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on his mind
and body. ‘I must rest,’ he muttered.
At this Gollum’s fear and agitation became so great that he spoke
again, hissing behind his hand, as if to keep the sound from unseen listeners in the air. ‘Not here, no. Not rest here. Fools! Eyes
can see us. When they come to the bridge they will see us. Come
away! Climb, climb! Come!’
‘Come, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘He’s right again. We can’t stay
here.’
‘All right,’ said Frodo in a remote voice, as of one speaking half
asleep. ‘I will try.’ Wearily he got to his feet.
But it was too late. At that moment the rock quivered and trembled
beneath them. The great rumbling noise, louder than ever before,
rolled in the ground and echoed in the mountains. Then with searing
suddenness there came a great red ﬂash. Far beyond the eastern
mountains it leapt into the sky and splashed the lowering clouds with
crimson. In that valley of shadow and cold deathly light it seemed
unbearably violent and ﬁerce. Peaks of stone and ridges like notched
knives sprang out in staring black against the uprushing ﬂame in
Gorgoroth. Then came a great crack of thunder.
And Minas Morgul answered. There was a ﬂare of livid lightnings:

706

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

forks of blue ﬂame springing up from the tower and from the encircling hills into the sullen clouds. The earth groaned; and out of
the city there came a cry. Mingled with harsh high voices as of birds
of prey, and the shrill neighing of horses wild with rage and fear,
there came a rending screech, shivering, rising swiftly to a piercing
pitch beyond the range of hearing. The hobbits wheeled round
towards it, and cast themselves down, holding their hands upon their
ears.
As the terrible cry ended, falling back through a long sickening
wail to silence, Frodo slowly raised his head. Across the narrow valley,
now almost on a level with his eyes, the walls of the evil city stood,
and its cavernous gate, shaped like an open mouth with gleaming
teeth, was gaping wide. And out of the gate an army came.
All that host was clad in sable, dark as the night. Against the wan
walls and the luminous pavement of the road Frodo could see them,
small black ﬁgures in rank upon rank, marching swiftly and silently,
passing outwards in an endless stream. Before them went a great
cavalry of horsemen moving like ordered shadows, and at their head
was one greater than all the rest: a Rider, all black, save that on his
hooded head he had a helm like a crown that ﬂickered with a perilous
light. Now he was drawing near the bridge below, and Frodo’s staring
eyes followed him, unable to wink or to withdraw. Surely there was
the Lord of the Nine Riders returned to earth to lead his ghastly
host to battle? Here, yes here indeed was the haggard king whose
cold hand had smitten down the Ring-bearer with his deadly knife.
The old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards
Frodo’s heart.
Even as these thoughts pierced him with dread and held him
bound as with a spell, the Rider halted suddenly, right before the
entrance of the bridge, and behind him all the host stood still. There
was a pause, a dead silence. Maybe it was the Ring that called to the
Wraith-lord, and for a moment he was troubled, sensing some other
power within his valley. This way and that turned the dark head
helmed and crowned with fear, sweeping the shadows with its unseen
eyes. Frodo waited, like a bird at the approach of a snake, unable to
move. And as he waited, he felt, more urgent than ever before, the
command that he should put on the Ring. But great as the pressure
was, he felt no inclination now to yield to it. He knew that the Ring
would only betray him, and that he had not, even if he put it on, the
power to face the Morgul-king – not yet. There was no longer any
answer to that command in his own will, dismayed by terror though
it was, and he felt only the beating upon him of a great power from
outside. It took his hand, and as Frodo watched with his mind, not
willing it but in suspense (as if he looked on some old story far away),

THE STAIRS OF CIRITH UNGOL

707

it moved the hand inch by inch towards the chain upon his neck.
Then his own will stirred; slowly it forced the hand back and set it
to ﬁnd another thing, a thing lying hidden near his breast. Cold and
hard it seemed as his grip closed on it: the phial of Galadriel, so long
treasured, and almost forgotten till that hour. As he touched it, for
a while all thought of the Ring was banished from his mind. He
sighed and bent his head.
At that moment the Wraith-king turned and spurred his horse and
rode across the bridge, and all his dark host followed him. Maybe
the elven-hoods deﬁed his unseen eyes, and the mind of his small
enemy, being strengthened, had turned aside his thought. But he was
in haste. Already the hour had struck, and at his great Master’s
bidding he must march with war into the West.
Soon he had passed, like a shadow into shadow, down the winding
road, and behind him still the black ranks crossed the bridge. So
great an army had never issued from that vale since the days of
Isildur’s might; no host so fell and strong in arms had yet assailed
the fords of Anduin; and yet it was but one and not the greatest of
the hosts that Mordor now sent forth.
Frodo stirred. And suddenly his heart went out to Faramir. ‘The
storm has burst at last,’ he thought. ‘This great array of spears and
swords is going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He
guessed it, but did he know the hour? And who can now hold the
fords when the King of the Nine Riders comes? And other armies
will come. I am too late. All is lost. I tarried on the way. All is lost.
Even if my errand is performed, no one will ever know. There will
be no one I can tell. It will be in vain.’ Overcome with weakness he
wept. And still the host of Morgul crossed the bridge.
Then at a great distance, as if it came out of memories of the
Shire, some sunlit early morning, when the day called and doors were
opening, he heard Sam’s voice speaking. ‘Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake
up!’ Had the voice added: ‘Your breakfast is ready,’ he would hardly
have been surprised. Certainly Sam was urgent. ‘Wake up, Mr.
Frodo! They’re gone,’ he said.
There was a dull clang. The gates of Minas Morgul had closed.
The last rank of spears had vanished down the road. The tower still
grinned across the valley, but the light was fading in it. The whole
city was falling back into a dark brooding shade, and silence. Yet still
it was ﬁlled with watchfulness.
‘Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They’re gone, and we’d better go too.
There’s something still alive in that place, something with eyes, or a
seeing mind, if you take me; and the longer we stay in one spot, the
sooner it will get on to us. Come on, Mr. Frodo!’

708

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Frodo raised his head, and then stood up. Despair had not left
him, but the weakness had passed. He even smiled grimly, feeling
now as clearly as a moment before he had felt the opposite, that what
he had to do, he had to do, if he could, and that whether Faramir
or Aragorn or Elrond or Galadriel or Gandalf or anyone else ever
knew about it was beside the purpose. He took his staff in one hand
and the phial in his other. When he saw that the clear light was
already welling through his ﬁngers, he thrust it into his bosom and
held it against his heart. Then turning from the city of Morgul, now
no more than a grey glimmer across a dark gulf, he prepared to take
the upward road.
Gollum, it seemed, had crawled off along the ledge into the darkness beyond, when the gates of Minas Morgul opened, leaving the
hobbits where they lay. He now came creeping back, his teeth
chattering and his ﬁngers snapping. ‘Foolish! Silly!’ he hissed. ‘Make
haste! They mustn’t think danger has passed. It hasn’t. Make haste!’
They did not answer, but they followed him on to the climbing
ledge. It was little to the liking of either of them, not even after facing
so many other perils; but it did not last long. Soon the path reached
a rounded angle where the mountain-side swelled out again, and
there it suddenly entered a narrow opening in the rock. They had
come to the ﬁrst stair that Gollum had spoken of. The darkness was
almost complete, and they could see nothing much beyond their
hands’ stretch; but Gollum’s eyes shone pale, several feet above, as
he turned back towards them.
‘Careful!’ he whispered. ‘Steps. Lots of steps. Must be careful!’
Care was certainly needed. Frodo and Sam at ﬁrst felt easier,
having now a wall on either side, but the stairway was almost as steep
as a ladder, and as they climbed up and up, they became more and
more aware of the long black fall behind them. And the steps were
narrow, spaced unevenly, and often treacherous: they were worn and
smooth at the edges, and some were broken, and some cracked as
foot was set upon them. The hobbits struggled on, until at last they
were clinging with desperate ﬁngers to the steps ahead, and forcing
their aching knees to bend and straighten; and ever as the stair cut
its way deeper into the sheer mountain the rocky walls rose higher
and higher above their heads.
At length, just as they felt that they could endure no more, they
saw Gollum’s eyes peering down at them again. ‘We’re up,’ he whispered. ‘First stair’s past. Clever hobbits to climb so high, very clever
hobbits. Just a few more little steps and that’s all, yes.’
Dizzy and very tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up
the last step, and sat down rubbing their legs and knees. They were

THE STAIRS OF CIRITH UNGOL

709

in a deep dark passage that seemed still to go up before them, though
at a gentler slope and without steps. Gollum did not let them rest
long.
‘There’s another stair still,’ he said. ‘Much longer stair. Rest when
we get to the top of next stair. Not yet.’
Sam groaned. ‘Longer, did you say?’ he asked.
‘Yes, yess, longer,’ said Gollum. ‘But not so difﬁcult. Hobbits
have climbed the Straight Stair. Next comes the Winding Stair.’
‘And what after that?’ said Sam.
‘We shall see,’ said Gollum softly. ‘O yes, we shall see!’
‘I thought you said there was a tunnel,’ said Sam. ‘Isn’t there a
tunnel or something to go through?’
‘O yes, there’s a tunnel,’ said Gollum. ‘But hobbits can rest before
they try that. If they get through that, they’ll be nearly at the top.
Very nearly, if they get through. O yes!’
Frodo shivered. The climb had made him sweat, but now he felt
cold and clammy, and there was a chill draught in the dark passage,
blowing down from the invisible heights above. He got up and shook
himself. ‘Well, let’s go on!’ he said. ‘This is no place to sit in.’
The passage seemed to go on for miles, and always the chill air
ﬂowed over them, rising as they went on to a bitter wind. The mountains seemed to be trying with their deadly breath to daunt them, to
turn them back from the secrets of the high places, or to blow them
away into the darkness behind. They only knew that they had come
to the end, when suddenly they felt no wall at their right hand. They
could see very little. Great black shapeless masses and deep grey
shadows loomed above them and about them, but now and again a
dull red light ﬂickered up under the lowering clouds, and for a
moment they were aware of tall peaks, in front and on either side,
like pillars holding up a vast sagging roof. They seemed to have
climbed up many hundreds of feet, on to a wide shelf. A cliff was on
their left and a chasm on their right.
Gollum led the way close under the cliff. For the present they
were no longer climbing, but the ground was now more broken and
dangerous in the dark, and there were blocks and lumps of fallen
stone in the way. Their going was slow and cautious. How many
hours had passed since they had entered the Morgul Vale neither
Sam nor Frodo could any longer guess. The night seemed endless.
At length they were once more aware of a wall looming up, and
once more a stairway opened before them. Again they halted, and
again they began to climb. It was a long and weary ascent; but this
stairway did not delve into the mountain-side. Here the huge cliff-face
sloped backwards, and the path like a snake wound to and fro across

710

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

it. At one point it crawled sideways right to the edge of the dark
chasm, and Frodo glancing down saw below him as a vast deep pit
the great ravine at the head of the Morgul Valley. Down in its depths
glimmered like a glow-worm thread the wraith-road from the dead
city to the Nameless Pass. He turned hastily away.
Still on and up the stairway bent and crawled, until at last with a
ﬁnal ﬂight, short and straight, it climbed out again on to another
level. The path had veered away from the main pass in the great
ravine, and it now followed its own perilous course at the bottom of
a lesser cleft among the higher regions of the Ephel Dúath. Dimly
the hobbits could discern tall piers and jagged pinnacles of stone on
either side, between which were great crevices and ﬁssures blacker
than the night, where forgotten winters had gnawed and carved the
sunless stone. And now the red light in the sky seemed stronger;
though they could not tell whether a dreadful morning were indeed
coming to this place of shadow, or whether they saw only the ﬂame
of some great violence of Sauron in the torment of Gorgoroth beyond.
Still far ahead, and still high above, Frodo, looking up, saw, as he
guessed, the very crown of this bitter road. Against the sullen redness
of the eastern sky a cleft was outlined in the topmost ridge, narrow,
deep-cloven between two black shoulders; and on either shoulder
was a horn of stone.
He paused and looked more attentively. The horn upon the left
was tall and slender; and in it burned a red light, or else the red light
in the land beyond was shining through a hole. He saw now: it was
a black tower poised above the outer pass. He touched Sam’s arm
and pointed.
‘I don’t like the look of that!’ said Sam. ‘So this secret way of
yours is guarded after all,’ he growled, turning to Gollum. ‘As you
knew all along, I suppose?’
‘All ways are watched, yes,’ said Gollum. ‘Of course they are. But
hobbits must try some way. This may be least watched. Perhaps
they’ve all gone away to big battle, perhaps!’
‘Perhaps,’ grunted Sam. ‘Well, it still seems a long way off, and
a long way up before we get there. And there’s still the tunnel. I
think you ought to rest now, Mr. Frodo. I don’t know what time of
day or night it is, but we’ve kept going for hours and hours.’
‘Yes, we must rest,’ said Frodo. ‘Let us ﬁnd some corner out of
the wind, and gather our strength – for the last lap.’ For so he felt
it to be. The terrors of the land beyond, and the deed to be
done there, seemed remote, too far off yet to trouble him. All his
mind was bent on getting through or over this impenetrable wall and
guard. If once he could do that impossible thing, then somehow the

THE STAIRS OF CIRITH UNGOL

711

errand would be accomplished, or so it seemed to him in that dark
hour of weariness, still labouring in the stony shadows under Cirith
Ungol.
In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock they sat down:
Frodo and Sam a little way within, and Gollum crouched upon the
ground near the opening. There the hobbits took what they expected
would be their last meal before they went down into the Nameless
Land, maybe the last meal they would ever eat together. Some of
the food of Gondor they ate, and wafers of the waybread of the Elves,
and they drank a little. But of their water they were sparing and took
only enough to moisten their dry mouths.
‘I wonder when we’ll ﬁnd water again?’ said Sam. ‘But I suppose
even over there they drink? Orcs drink, don’t they?’
‘Yes, they drink,’ said Frodo. ‘But do not let us speak of that.
Such drink is not for us.’
‘Then all the more need to ﬁll our bottles,’ said Sam. ‘But there
isn’t any water up here: not a sound or a trickle have I heard. And
anyway Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul.’
‘No water ﬂowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words,’ said
Frodo. ‘We are not in that valley now, and if we came on a spring
it would be ﬂowing into it and not out of it.’
‘I wouldn’t trust it,’ said Sam, ‘not till I was dying of thirst. There’s
a wicked feeling about this place.’ He sniffed. ‘And a smell, I fancy.
Do you notice it? A queer kind of a smell, stuffy. I don’t like it.’
‘I don’t like anything here at all,’ said Frodo, ‘step or stone, breath
or bone. Earth, air and water all seem accursed. But so our path is
laid.’
‘Yes, that’s so,’ said Sam. ‘And we shouldn’t be here at all, if we’d
known more about it before we started. But I suppose it’s often
that way. The brave things in the old tales and songs, Mr. Frodo:
adventures, as I used to call them. I used to think that they were
things the wonderful folk of the stories went out and looked for,
because they wanted them, because they were exciting and life was
a bit dull, a kind of a sport, as you might say. But that’s not the way
of it with the tales that really mattered, or the ones that stay in the
mind. Folk seem to have been just landed in them, usually – their
paths were laid that way, as you put it. But I expect they had lots of
chances, like us, of turning back, only they didn’t. And if they had,
we shouldn’t know, because they’d have been forgotten. We hear
about those as just went on – and not all to a good end, mind you;
at least not to what folk inside a story and not outside it call a good
end. You know, coming home, and ﬁnding things all right, though
not quite the same – like old Mr. Bilbo. But those aren’t always the

712

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

best tales to hear, though they may be the best tales to get landed
in! I wonder what sort of a tale we’ve fallen into?’
‘I wonder,’ said Frodo. ‘But I don’t know. And that’s the way of
a real tale. Take any one that you’re fond of. You may know, or
guess, what kind of a tale it is, happy-ending or sad-ending, but the
people in it don’t know. And you don’t want them to.’
‘No, sir, of course not. Beren now, he never thought he was going
to get that Silmaril from the Iron Crown in Thangorodrim, and yet
he did, and that was a worse place and a blacker danger than ours.
But that’s a long tale, of course, and goes on past the happiness and
into grief and beyond it – and the Silmaril went on and came to
Eärendil. And why, sir, I never thought of that before! We’ve got –
you’ve got some of the light of it in that star-glass that the Lady gave
you! Why, to think of it, we’re in the same tale still! It’s going on.
Don’t the great tales never end?’
‘No, they never end as tales,’ said Frodo. ‘But the people in them
come, and go when their part’s ended. Our part will end later – or
sooner.’
‘And then we can have some rest and some sleep,’ said Sam. He
laughed grimly. ‘And I mean just that, Mr. Frodo. I mean plain
ordinary rest, and sleep, and waking up to a morning’s work in the
garden. I’m afraid that’s all I’m hoping for all the time. All the big
important plans are not for my sort. Still, I wonder if we shall ever
be put into songs or tales. We’re in one, of course; but I mean: put
into words, you know, told by the ﬁreside, or read out of a great big
book with red and black letters, years and years afterwards. And
people will say: ‘‘Let’s hear about Frodo and the Ring!’’ And they’ll
say: ‘‘Yes, that’s one of my favourite stories. Frodo was very brave,
wasn’t he, dad?’’ ‘‘Yes, my boy, the famousest of the hobbits, and
that’s saying a lot.’’ ’
‘It’s saying a lot too much,’ said Frodo, and he laughed, a long
clear laugh from his heart. Such a sound had not been heard in
those places since Sauron came to Middle-earth. To Sam suddenly
it seemed as if all the stones were listening and the tall rocks leaning
over them. But Frodo did not heed them; he laughed again. ‘Why,
Sam,’ he said, ‘to hear you somehow makes me as merry as if the
story was already written. But you’ve left out one of the chief characters: Samwise the stouthearted. ‘‘I want to hear more about Sam,
dad. Why didn’t they put in more of his talk, dad? That’s what I
like, it makes me laugh. And Frodo wouldn’t have got far without
Sam, would he, dad?’’ ’
‘Now, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam, ‘you shouldn’t make fun. I was
serious.’
‘So was I,’ said Frodo, ‘and so I am. We’re going on a bit too

THE STAIRS OF CIRITH UNGOL

713

fast. You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the worst places of the story,
and it is all too likely that some will say at this point: ‘‘Shut the book
now, dad; we don’t want to read any more.’’ ’
‘Maybe,’ said Sam, ‘but I wouldn’t be one to say that. Things
done and over and made into part of the great tales are different.
Why, even Gollum might be good in a tale, better than he is to have
by you, anyway. And he used to like tales himself once, by his own
account. I wonder if he thinks he’s the hero or the villain?
‘Gollum!’ he called. ‘Would you like to be the hero – now where’s
he got to again?’
There was no sign of him at the mouth of their shelter nor in the
shadows near. He had refused their food, though he had, as usual,
accepted a mouthful of water; and then he had seemed to curl up
for a sleep. They had supposed that one at any rate of his objects in
his long absence the day before had been to hunt for food to his own
liking; and now he had evidently slipped off again while they talked.
But what for this time?
‘I don’t like his sneaking off without saying,’ said Sam. ‘And least
of all now. He can’t be looking for food up here, not unless there’s
some kind of rock he fancies. Why, there isn’t even a bit of moss!’
‘It’s no good worrying about him now,’ said Frodo. ‘We couldn’t
have got so far, not even within sight of the pass, without him, and
so we’ll have to put up with his ways. If he’s false, he’s false.’
‘All the same, I’d rather have him under my eye,’ said Sam. ‘All
the more so, if he’s false. Do you remember he never would say if
this pass was guarded or no? And now we see a tower there – and it
may be deserted, and it may not. Do you think he’s gone to fetch
them, Orcs or whatever they are?’
‘No, I don’t think so,’ answered Frodo. ‘Even if he’s up to some
wickedness, and I suppose that’s not unlikely. I don’t think it’s that:
not to fetch Orcs, or any servants of the Enemy. Why wait till now,
and go through all the labour of the climb, and come so near the
land he fears? He could probably have betrayed us to Orcs many
times since we met him. No, if it’s anything, it will be some little
private trick of his own that he thinks is quite secret.’
‘Well, I suppose you’re right, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘Not that it
comforts me mightily. I don’t make no mistake: I don’t doubt he’d
hand me over to Orcs as gladly as kiss his hand. But I was forgetting
– his Precious. No, I suppose the whole time it’s been The Precious
for poor Sméagol. That’s the one idea in all his little schemes, if he
has any. But how bringing us up here will help him in that is more
than I can guess.’
‘Very likely he can’t guess himself,’ said Frodo. ‘And I don’t think
he’s got just one plain scheme in his muddled head. I think he really

714

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

is in part trying to save the Precious from the Enemy, as long as he
can. For that would be the last disaster for himself too, if the Enemy
got it. And in the other part, perhaps, he’s just biding his time and
waiting on chance.’
‘Yes, Slinker and Stinker, as I’ve said before,’ said Sam. ‘But the
nearer they get to the Enemy’s land the more like Stinker Slinker
will get. Mark my words: if ever we get to the pass, he won’t let us
really take the precious thing over the border without making some
kind of trouble.’
‘We haven’t got there yet,’ said Frodo.
‘No, but we’d better keep our eyes skinned till we do. If we’re
caught napping, Stinker will come out on top pretty quick. Not but
what it would be safe for you to have a wink now, master. Safe, if
you lay close to me. I’d be dearly glad to see you have a sleep. I’d
keep watch over you; and anyway, if you lay near, with my arm round
you, no one could come pawing you without your Sam knowing it.’
‘Sleep!’ said Frodo and sighed, as if out of a desert he had seen a
mirage of cool green. ‘Yes, even here I could sleep.’
‘Sleep then, master! Lay your head in my lap.’
And so Gollum found them hours later, when he returned, crawling and creeping down the path out of the gloom ahead. Sam sat
propped against the stone, his head dropping sideways and his breathing heavy. In his lap lay Frodo’s head, drowned deep in sleep; upon
his white forehead lay one of Sam’s brown hands, and the other lay
softly upon his master’s breast. Peace was in both their faces.
Gollum looked at them. A strange expression passed over his lean
hungry face. The gleam faded from his eyes, and they went dim and
grey, old and tired. A spasm of pain seemed to twist him, and he
turned away, peering back up towards the pass, shaking his head, as
if engaged in some interior debate. Then he came back, and slowly
putting out a trembling hand, very cautiously he touched Frodo’s
knee – but almost the touch was a caress. For a ﬂeeting moment,
could one of the sleepers have seen him, they would have thought
that they beheld an old weary hobbit, shrunken by the years that had
carried him far beyond his time, beyond friends and kin, and the
ﬁelds and streams of youth, an old starved pitiable thing.
But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in his sleep,
and immediately Sam was wide awake. The ﬁrst thing he saw was
Gollum – ‘pawing at master,’ as he thought.
‘Hey you!’ he said roughly. ‘What are you up to?’
‘Nothing, nothing,’ said Gollum softly. ‘Nice Master!’
‘I daresay,’ said Sam. ‘But where have you been to – sneaking off
and sneaking back, you old villain?’

THE STAIRS OF CIRITH UNGOL

715

Gollum withdrew himself, and a green glint ﬂickered under his
heavy lids. Almost spider-like he looked now, crouched back on his
bent limbs, with his protruding eyes. The ﬂeeting moment had
passed, beyond recall. ‘Sneaking, sneaking!’ he hissed. ‘Hobbits
always so polite, yes. O nice hobbits! Sméagol brings them up secret
ways that nobody else could ﬁnd. Tired he is, thirsty he is, yes thirsty;
and he guides them and he searches for paths, and they say sneak,
sneak. Very nice friends, O yes my precious, very nice.’
Sam felt a bit remorseful, though not more trustful. ‘Sorry,’ he
said. ‘I’m sorry, but you startled me out of my sleep. And I shouldn’t
have been sleeping, and that made me a bit sharp. But Mr. Frodo,
he’s that tired, I asked him to have a wink; and well, that’s how it
is. Sorry. But where have you been to?’
‘Sneaking,’ said Gollum, and the green glint did not leave his eyes.
‘O very well,’ said Sam, ‘have it your own way! I don’t suppose
it’s so far from the truth. And now we’d better all be sneaking along
together. What’s the time? Is it today or tomorrow?’
‘It’s tomorrow,’ said Gollum, ‘or this was tomorrow when hobbits
went to sleep. Very foolish, very dangerous – if poor Sméagol wasn’t
sneaking about to watch.’
‘I think we shall get tired of that word soon,’ said Sam. ‘But never
mind. I’ll wake master up.’ Gently he smoothed the hair back from
Frodo’s brow, and bending down spoke softly to him.
‘Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up!’
Frodo stirred and opened his eyes, and smiled, seeing Sam’s face
bending over him. ‘Calling me early aren’t you, Sam?’ he said. ‘It’s
dark still!’
‘Yes it’s always dark here,’ said Sam. ‘But Gollum’s come back,
Mr. Frodo, and he says it’s tomorrow. So we must be walking on.
The last lap.’
Frodo drew a deep breath and sat up. ‘The last lap!’ he said.
‘Hullo, Sméagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest?’
‘No food, no rest, nothing for Sméagol,’ said Gollum. ‘He’s a
sneak.’
Sam clicked his tongue, but restrained himself.
‘Don’t take names to yourself, Sméagol,’ said Frodo. ‘It’s unwise,
whether they are true or false.’
‘Sméagol has to take what’s given him,’ answered Gollum. ‘He
was given that name by kind Master Samwise, the hobbit that knows
so much.’
Frodo looked at Sam. ‘Yes sir,’ he said. ‘I did use the word, waking
up out of my sleep sudden and all and ﬁnding him at hand. I said I
was sorry, but I soon shan’t be.’
‘Come, let it pass then,’ said Frodo. ‘But now we seem to have

716

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

come to the point, you and I, Sméagol. Tell me. Can we ﬁnd the
rest of the way by ourselves? We’re in sight of the pass, of a way in,
and if we can ﬁnd it now, then I suppose our agreement can be said
to be over. You have done what you promised, and you’re free: free
to go back to food and rest, wherever you wish to go, except to
servants of the Enemy. And one day I may reward you, I or those
that remember me.’
‘No, no, not yet,’ Gollum whined. ‘O no! They can’t ﬁnd the
way themselves, can they? O no indeed. There’s the tunnel coming.
Sméagol must go on. No rest. No food. Not yet.’

Chapter 9
SHELOB’S LAIR
It may indeed have been daytime now, as Gollum said, but the
hobbits could see little difference, unless, perhaps, the heavy sky
above was less utterly black, more like a great roof of smoke; while
instead of the darkness of deep night, which lingered still in cracks
and holes, a grey blurring shadow shrouded the stony world about
them. They passed on, Gollum in front and the hobbits now side by
side, up the long ravine between the piers and columns of torn and
weathered rock, standing like huge unshapen statues on either hand.
There was no sound. Some way ahead, a mile or so, perhaps, was a
great grey wall, a last huge upthrusting mass of mountain-stone.
Darker it loomed, and steadily it rose as they approached, until it
towered up high above them, shutting out the view of all that lay
beyond. Deep shadow lay before its feet. Sam sniffed the air.
‘Ugh! That smell!’ he said. ‘It’s getting stronger and stronger.’
Presently they were under the shadow, and there in the midst of
it they saw the opening of a cave. ‘This is the way in,’ said Gollum
softly. ‘This is the entrance to the tunnel.’ He did not speak its name:
Torech Ungol, Shelob’s Lair. Out of it came a stench, not the sickly
odour of decay in the meads of Morgul, but a foul reek, as if ﬁlth
unnameable were piled and hoarded in the dark within.
‘Is this the only way, Sméagol?’ said Frodo.
‘Yes, yes,’ he answered. ‘Yes, we must go this way now.’
‘D’you mean to say you’ve been through this hole?’ said Sam.
‘Phew! But perhaps you don’t mind bad smells.’
Gollum’s eyes glinted. ‘He doesn’t know what we minds, does he,
precious? No, he doesn’t. But Sméagol can bear things. Yes. He’s
been through. O yes, right through. It’s the only way.’
‘And what makes the smell, I wonder,’ said Sam. ‘It’s like – well,
I wouldn’t like to say. Some beastly hole of the Orcs, I’ll warrant,
with a hundred years of their ﬁlth in it.’
‘Well,’ said Frodo, ‘Orcs or no, if it’s the only way, we must take
it.’
Drawing a deep breath they passed inside. In a few steps they were
in utter and impenetrable dark. Not since the lightless passages of
Moria had Frodo or Sam known such darkness, and if possible here
it was deeper and denser. There, there were airs moving, and echoes,
and a sense of space. Here the air was still, stagnant, heavy, and

718

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

sound fell dead. They walked as it were in a black vapour wrought
of veritable darkness itself that, as it was breathed, brought blindness
not only to the eyes but to the mind, so that even the memory of
colours and of forms and of any light faded out of thought. Night
always had been, and always would be, and night was all.
But for a while they could still feel, and indeed the senses of their
feet and ﬁngers at ﬁrst seemed sharpened almost painfully. The walls
felt, to their surprise, smooth, and the ﬂoor, save for a step now and
again, was straight and even, going ever up at the same stiff slope.
The tunnel was high and wide, so wide that, though the hobbits
walked abreast, only touching the side-walls with their outstretched
hands, they were separated, cut off alone in the darkness.
Gollum had gone in ﬁrst and seemed to be only a few steps ahead.
While they were still able to give heed to such things, they could hear
his breath hissing and gasping just in front of them. But after a time
their senses became duller, both touch and hearing seemed to grow
numb, and they kept on, groping, walking, on and on, mainly by the
force of the will with which they had entered, will to go through and
desire to come at last to the high gate beyond.
Before they had gone very far, perhaps, but time and distance soon
passed out of his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling the wall, was
aware that there was an opening at the side: for a moment he caught
a faint breath of some air less heavy, and then they passed it by.
‘There’s more than one passage here,’ he whispered with an effort:
it seemed hard to make his breath give any sound. ‘It’s as orc-like a
place as ever there could be!’
After that, ﬁrst he on the right, and then Frodo on the left, passed
three or four such openings, some wider, some smaller; but there
was as yet no doubt of the main way, for it was straight, and did not
turn, and still went steadily up. But how long was it, how much
more of this would they have to endure, or could they endure? The
breathlessness of the air was growing as they climbed; and now they
seemed often in the blind dark to sense some resistance thicker than
the foul air. As they thrust forward they felt things brush against their
heads, or against their hands, long tentacles, or hanging growths
perhaps: they could not tell what they were. And still the stench grew.
It grew, until almost it seemed to them that smell was the only clear
sense left to them, and that was for their torment. One hour, two
hours, three hours: how many had they passed in this lightless hole?
Hours – days, weeks rather. Sam left the tunnel-side and shrank
towards Frodo, and their hands met and clasped, and so together
they still went on.
At length Frodo, groping along the left-hand wall, came suddenly
to a void. Almost he fell sideways into the emptiness. Here was some

SHELOB’S LAIR

719

opening in the rock far wider than any they had yet passed; and out
of it came a reek so foul, and a sense of lurking malice so intense,
that Frodo reeled. And at that moment Sam too lurched and fell
forwards.
Fighting off both the sickness and the fear, Frodo gripped Sam’s
hand. ‘Up!’ he said in a hoarse breath without voice. ‘It all comes
from here, the stench and the peril. Now for it! Quick!’
Calling up his remaining strength and resolution, he dragged Sam
to his feet, and forced his own limbs to move. Sam stumbled beside
him. One step, two steps, three steps – at last six steps. Maybe they
had passed the dreadful unseen opening, but whether that was so or
not, suddenly it was easier to move, as if some hostile will for the
moment had released them. They struggled on, still hand in hand.
But almost at once they came to a new difﬁculty. The tunnel
forked, or so it seemed, and in the dark they could not tell which
was the wider way, or which kept nearer to the straight. Which should
they take, the left, or the right? They knew of nothing to guide them,
yet a false choice would almost certainly be fatal.
‘Which way has Gollum gone?’ panted Sam. ‘And why didn’t he
wait?’
‘Sméagol!’ said Frodo, trying to call. ‘Sméagol!’ But his voice
croaked, and the name fell dead almost as it left his lips. There was
no answer, not an echo, not even a tremor of the air.
‘He’s really gone this time, I fancy,’ muttered Sam. ‘I guess this
is just exactly where he meant to bring us. Gollum! If ever I lay hands
on you again, you’ll be sorry for it.’
Presently, groping and fumbling in the dark, they found that the
opening on the left was blocked: either it was a blind, or else some
great stone had fallen in the passage. ‘This can’t be the way,’ Frodo
whispered. ‘Right or wrong, we must take the other.’
‘And quick!’ Sam panted. ‘There’s something worse than Gollum
about. I can feel something looking at us.’
They had not gone more than a few yards when from behind them
came a sound, startling and horrible in the heavy padded silence: a
gurgling, bubbling noise, and a long venomous hiss. They wheeled
round, but nothing could be seen. Still as stones they stood, staring,
waiting for they did not know what.
‘It’s a trap!’ said Sam, and he laid his hand upon the hilt of his
sword; and as he did so, he thought of the darkness of the barrow
whence it came. ‘I wish old Tom was near us now!’ he thought.
Then, as he stood, darkness about him and a blackness of despair
and anger in his heart, it seemed to him that he saw a light: a light
in his mind, almost unbearably bright at ﬁrst, as a sun-ray to the eyes
of one long hidden in a windowless pit. Then the light became colour:

720

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

green, gold, silver, white. Far off, as in a little picture drawn by
elven-ﬁngers, he saw the Lady Galadriel standing on the grass in
Lórien, and gifts were in her hands. And you, Ring-bearer, he heard
her say, remote but clear, for you I have prepared this.
The bubbling hiss drew nearer, and there was a creaking as of
some great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark.
A reek came on before it. ‘Master, master!’ cried Sam, and life and
urgency came back into his voice. ‘The Lady’s gift! The star-glass!
A light to you in dark places, she said it was to be. The star-glass!’
‘The star-glass?’ muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep,
hardly comprehending. ‘Why yes! Why had I forgotten it? A light
when all other lights go out! And now indeed light alone can help us.’
Slowly his hand went to his bosom, and slowly he held aloft the
Phial of Galadriel. For a moment it glimmered, faint as a rising star
struggling in heavy earthward mists, and then as its power waxed,
and hope grew in Frodo’s mind, it began to burn, and kindled to a
silver ﬂame, a minute heart of dazzling light, as though Eärendil had
himself come down from the high sunset paths with the last Silmaril
upon his brow. The darkness receded from it, until it seemed to shine
in the centre of a globe of airy crystal, and the hand that held it
sparkled with white ﬁre.
Frodo gazed in wonder at this marvellous gift that he had so
long carried, not guessing its full worth and potency. Seldom had he
remembered it on the road, until they came to Morgul Vale, and
never had he used it for fear of its revealing light. Aiya Eärendil Elenion
Ancalima! he cried, and knew not what he had spoken; for it seemed
that another voice spoke through his, clear, untroubled by the foul
air of the pit.
But other potencies there are in Middle-earth, powers of night,
and they are old and strong. And She that walked in the darkness
had heard the Elves cry that cry far back in the deeps of time, and
she had not heeded it, and it did not daunt her now. Even as Frodo
spoke he felt a great malice bent upon him, and a deadly regard
considering him. Not far down the tunnel, between them and the
opening where they had reeled and stumbled, he was aware of eyes
growing visible, two great clusters of many-windowed eyes – the
coming menace was unmasked at last. The radiance of the star-glass
was broken and thrown back from their thousand facets, but behind
the glitter a pale deadly ﬁre began steadily to glow within, a ﬂame
kindled in some deep pit of evil thought. Monstrous and abominable
eyes they were, bestial and yet ﬁlled with purpose and with hideous
delight, gloating over their prey trapped beyond all hope of escape.
*
*
*

SHELOB’S LAIR

721

Frodo and Sam, horror-stricken, began slowly to back away, their
own gaze held by the dreadful stare of those baleful eyes; but as they
backed so the eyes advanced. Frodo’s hand wavered, and slowly the
Phial drooped. Then suddenly, released from the holding spell to
run a little while in vain panic for the amusement of the eyes, they
both turned and ﬂed together; but even as they ran Frodo looked
back and saw with terror that at once the eyes came leaping up
behind. The stench of death was like a cloud about him.
‘Stand! stand!’ he cried desperately. ‘Running is no use.’
Slowly the eyes crept nearer.
‘Galadriel!’ he called, and gathering his courage he lifted up the
Phial once more. The eyes halted. For a moment their regard relaxed,
as if some hint of doubt troubled them. Then Frodo’s heart ﬂamed
within him, and without thinking what he did, whether it was folly
or despair or courage, he took the Phial in his left hand, and with
his right hand drew his sword. Sting ﬂashed out, and the sharp elvenblade sparkled in the silver light, but at its edges a blue ﬁre ﬂickered.
Then holding the star aloft and the bright sword advanced, Frodo,
hobbit of the Shire, walked steadily down to meet the eyes.
They wavered. Doubt came into them as the light approached.
One by one they dimmed, and slowly they drew back. No brightness
so deadly had ever afﬂicted them before. From sun and moon and
star they had been safe underground, but now a star had descended
into the very earth. Still it approached, and the eyes began to quail.
One by one they all went dark; they turned away, and a great bulk,
beyond the light’s reach, heaved its huge shadow in between. They
were gone.
‘Master, master!’ cried Sam. He was close behind, his own sword
drawn and ready. ‘Stars and glory! But the Elves would make a song
of that, if ever they heard of it! And may I live to tell them and hear
them sing. But don’t go on, master! Don’t go down to that den!
Now’s our only chance. Now let’s get out of this foul hole!’
And so back they turned once more, ﬁrst walking and then running; for as they went the ﬂoor of the tunnel rose steeply, and with
every stride they climbed higher above the stenches of the unseen
lair, and strength returned to limb and heart. But still the hatred of
the Watcher lurked behind them, blind for a while, perhaps, but
undefeated, still bent on death. And now there came a ﬂow of air to
meet them, cold and thin. The opening, the tunnel’s end, at last it
was before them. Panting, yearning for a rooﬂess place, they ﬂung
themselves forward; and then in amazement they staggered, tumbling
back. The outlet was blocked with some barrier, but not of stone:
soft and a little yielding it seemed, and yet strong and impervious;

722

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

air ﬁltered through, but not a glimmer of any light. Once more they
charged and were hurled back.
Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and before him he saw a
greyness which the radiance of the star-glass did not pierce and did
not illuminate, as if it were a shadow that being cast by no light, no
light could dissipate. Across the width and height of the tunnel a
vast web was spun, orderly as the web of some huge spider, but
denser-woven and far greater, and each thread was as thick as rope.
Sam laughed grimly. ‘Cobwebs!’ he said. ‘Is that all? Cobwebs!
But what a spider! Have at ’em, down with ’em!’
In a fury he hewed at them with his sword, but the thread that he
struck did not break. It gave a little and then sprang back like a
plucked bowstring, turning the blade and tossing up both sword and
arm. Three times Sam struck with all his force, and at last one single
cord of all the countless cords snapped and twisted, curling and
whipping through the air. One end of it lashed Sam’s hand, and he
cried out in pain, starting back and drawing his hand across his
mouth.
‘It will take days to clear the road like this,’ he said. ‘What’s to
be done? Have those eyes come back?’
‘No, not to be seen,’ said Frodo. ‘But I still feel that they are
looking at me, or thinking about me: making some other plan, perhaps. If this light were lowered, or if it failed, they would quickly
come again.’
‘Trapped in the end!’ said Sam bitterly, his anger rising again above
weariness and despair. ‘Gnats in a net. May the curse of Faramir bite
that Gollum and bite him quick!’
‘That would not help us now,’ said Frodo. ‘Come! Let us see what
Sting can do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the
dark ravines of Beleriand where it was forged. But you must be the
guard and hold back the eyes. Here, take the star-glass. Do not be
afraid. Hold it up and watch!’
Then Frodo stepped up to the great grey net, and hewed it with
a wide sweeping stroke, drawing the bitter edge swiftly across a ladder
of close-strung cords, and at once springing away. The blue-gleaming
blade shore through them like a scythe through grass, and they leaped
and writhed and then hung loose. A great rent was made.
Stroke after stroke he dealt, until at last all the web within his
reach was shattered, and the upper portion blew and swayed like a
loose veil in the incoming wind. The trap was broken.
‘Come!’ cried Frodo. ‘On! On!’ Wild joy at their escape from the
very mouth of despair suddenly ﬁlled all his mind. His head whirled as
with a draught of potent wine. He sprang out, shouting as he came.

SHELOB’S LAIR

723

It seemed light in that dark land to his eyes that had passed through
the den of night. The great smokes had risen and grown thinner, and
the last hours of a sombre day were passing; the red glare of Mordor
had died away in sullen gloom. Yet it seemed to Frodo that he looked
upon a morning of sudden hope. Almost he had reached the summit
of the wall. Only a little higher now. The Cleft, Cirith Ungol, was
before him, a dim notch in the black ridge, and the horns of rock
darkling in the sky on either side. A short race, a sprinter’s course,
and he would be through!
‘The pass, Sam!’ he cried, not heeding the shrillness of his voice,
that released from the choking airs of the tunnel rang out now high
and wild. ‘The pass! Run, run, and we’ll be through – through before
anyone can stop us!’
Sam came up behind as fast as he could urge his legs; but glad as
he was to be free, he was uneasy, and as he ran, he kept on glancing
back at the dark arch of the tunnel, fearing to see eyes, or some shape
beyond his imagining, spring out in pursuit. Too little did he or his
master know of the craft of Shelob. She had many exits from her
lair.
There agelong she had dwelt, an evil thing in spider-form, even
such as once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West
that is now under the Sea, such as Beren fought in the Mountains
of Terror in Doriath, and so came to Lúthien upon the green sward
amid the hemlocks in the moonlight long ago. How Shelob came
there, ﬂying from ruin, no tale tells, for out of the Dark Years few
tales have come. But still she was there, who was there before Sauron,
and before the ﬁrst stone of Barad-dûr; and she served none but
herself, drinking the blood of Elves and Men, bloated and grown fat
with endless brooding on her feasts, weaving webs of shadow; for all
living things were her food, and her vomit darkness. Far and wide
her lesser broods, bastards of the miserable mates, her own offspring,
that she slew, spread from glen to glen, from the Ephel Dúath to the
eastern hills, to Dol Guldur and the fastnesses of Mirkwood. But
none could rival her, Shelob the Great, last child of Ungoliant to
trouble the unhappy world.
Already, years before, Gollum had beheld her, Sméagol who pried
into all dark holes, and in past days he had bowed and worshipped
her, and the darkness of her evil will walked through all the ways of
his weariness beside him, cutting him off from light and from regret.
And he had promised to bring her food. But her lust was not his
lust. Little she knew of or cared for towers, or rings, or anything
devised by mind or hand, who only desired death for all others,
mind and body, and for herself a glut of life, alone, swollen till the

724

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

mountains could no longer hold her up and the darkness could not
contain her.
But that desire was yet far away, and long now had she been
hungry, lurking in her den, while the power of Sauron grew, and
light and living things forsook his borders; and the city in the valley
was dead, and no Elf or Man came near, only the unhappy Orcs.
Poor food and wary. But she must eat, and however busily they
delved new winding passages from the pass and from their tower,
ever she found some way to snare them. But she lusted for sweeter
meat. And Gollum had brought it to her.
‘We’ll see, we’ll see,’ he said often to himself, when the evil mood
was on him, as he walked the dangerous road from Emyn Muil to
Morgul Vale, ‘we’ll see. lt may well be, O yes, it may well be that
when She throws away the bones and the empty garments, we shall
ﬁnd it, we shall get it, the Precious, a reward for poor Sméagol who
brings nice food. And we’ll save the Precious, as we promised. O
yes. And when we’ve got it safe, then She’ll know it, O yes, then
we’ll pay Her back, my precious. Then we’ll pay everyone back!’
So he thought in an inner chamber of his cunning, which he still
hoped to hide from her, even when he had come to her again and
had bowed low before her while his companions slept.
And as for Sauron: he knew where she lurked. It pleased him that
she should dwell there hungry but unabated in malice, a more sure
watch upon that ancient path into his land than any other that his
skill could have devised. And Orcs, they were useful slaves, but he
had them in plenty. If now and again Shelob caught them to stay
her appetite, she was welcome: he could spare them. And sometimes
as a man may cast a dainty to his cat (his cat he calls her, but she
owns him not) Sauron would send her prisoners that he had no better
uses for: he would have them driven to her hole, and report brought
back to him of the play she made.
So they both lived, delighting in their own devices, and feared no
assault, nor wrath, nor any end of their wickedness. Never yet had
any ﬂy escaped from Shelob’s webs, and the greater now was her
rage and hunger.
But nothing of this evil which they had stirred up against them
did poor Sam know, except that a fear was growing on him, a menace
which he could not see; and such a weight did it become that it was
a burden to him to run, and his feet seemed leaden.
Dread was round him, and enemies before him in the pass, and
his master was in a fey mood running heedlessly to meet them. Turning his eyes away from the shadow behind and the deep gloom
beneath the cliff upon his left, he looked ahead, and he saw two

SHELOB’S LAIR

725

things that increased his dismay. He saw that the sword which Frodo
still held unsheathed was glittering with blue ﬂame; and he saw that
though the sky behind was now dark, still the window in the tower
was glowing red.
‘Orcs!’ he muttered. ‘We’ll never rush it like this. There’s Orcs
about, and worse than Orcs.’ Then returning quickly to his long habit
of secrecy, he closed his hand about the precious Phial which he still
bore. Red with his own living blood his hand shone for a moment,
and then he thrust the revealing light deep into a pocket near his
breast and drew his elven-cloak about him. Now he tried to quicken
his pace. His master was gaining on him; already he was some twenty
strides ahead, ﬂitting on like a shadow; soon he would be lost to sight
in that grey world.
Hardly had Sam hidden the light of the star-glass when she came.
A little way ahead and to his left he saw suddenly, issuing from a
black hole of shadow under the cliff, the most loathly shape that he
had ever beheld, horrible beyond the horror of an evil dream. Most
like a spider she was, but huger than the great hunting beasts, and
more terrible than they because of the evil purpose in her remorseless
eyes. Those same eyes that he had thought daunted and defeated,
there they were lit with a fell light again, clustering in her out-thrust
head. Great horns she had, and behind her short stalk-like neck was
her huge swollen body, a vast bloated bag, swaying and sagging
between her legs; its great bulk was black, blotched with livid marks,
but the belly underneath was pale and luminous and gave forth a
stench. Her legs were bent, with great knobbed joints high above her
back, and hairs that stuck out like steel spines, and at each leg’s end
there was a claw.
As soon as she had squeezed her soft squelching body and its
folded limbs out of the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a
horrible speed, now running on her creaking legs, now making a
sudden bound. She was between Sam and his master. Either she did
not see Sam, or she avoided him for the moment as the bearer of
the light, and ﬁxed all her intent upon one prey, upon Frodo, bereft
of his Phial, running heedless up the path, unaware yet of his peril.
Swiftly he ran, but Shelob was swifter; in a few leaps she would have
him.
Sam gasped and gathered all his remaining breath to shout. ‘Look
out behind!’ he yelled. ‘Look out, master! I’m’ – but suddenly his
cry was stiﬂed.
A long clammy hand went over his mouth and another caught
him by the neck, while something wrapped itself about his leg. Taken
off his guard he toppled backwards into the arms of his attacker.

726

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Got him!’ hissed Gollum in his ear. ‘At last, my precious, we’ve
got him, yes, the nassty hobbit. We takes this one. She’ll get the other.
O yes, Shelob will get him, not Sméagol: he promised; he won’t
hurt Master at all. But he’s got you, you nassty ﬁlthy little sneak!’
He spat on Sam’s neck.
Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master
was in deadly peril, gave to Sam a sudden violence and strength that
was far beyond anything that Gollum had expected from this slow
stupid hobbit, as he thought him. Not Gollum himself could have
twisted more quickly or more ﬁercely. His hold on Sam’s mouth
slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged forward again, trying to tear
away from the grip on his neck. His sword was still in his hand, and
on his left arm, hanging by its thong, was Faramir’s staff. Desperately
he tried to turn and stab his enemy. But Gollum was too quick. His
long right arm shot out, and he grabbed Sam’s wrist: his ﬁngers were
like a vice; slowly and relentlessly he bent the hand down and forward,
till with a cry of pain Sam released the sword and it fell to the ground;
and all the while Gollum’s other hand was tightening on Sam’s throat.
Then Sam played his last trick. With all his strength he pulled
away and got his feet ﬁrmly planted; then suddenly he drove his legs
against the ground and with his whole force hurled himself backwards.
Not expecting even this simple trick from Sam, Gollum fell over
with Sam on top, and he received the weight of the sturdy hobbit in
his stomach. A sharp hiss came out of him, and for a second his
hand upon Sam’s throat loosened; but his ﬁngers still gripped the
sword-hand. Sam tore himself forward and away, and stood up, and
then quickly he wheeled away to his right, pivoted on the wrist held
by Gollum. Laying hold of the staff with his left hand, Sam swung
it up, and down it came with a whistling crack on Gollum’s outstretched arm, just below the elbow.
With a squeal Gollum let go. Then Sam waded in; not waiting to
change the staff from left to right he dealt another savage blow. Quick
as a snake Gollum slithered aside, and the stroke aimed at his head
fell across his back. The staff cracked and broke. That was enough
for him. Grabbing from behind was an old game of his, and seldom
had he failed in it. But this time, misled by spite, he had made the
mistake of speaking and gloating before he had both hands on his
victim’s neck. Everything had gone wrong with his beautiful plan,
since that horrible light had so unexpectedly appeared in the darkness.
And now he was face to face with a furious enemy, little less than
his own size. This ﬁght was not for him. Sam swept up his sword
from the ground and raised it. Gollum squealed, and springing aside
on to all fours, he jumped away in one big bound like a frog. Before

SHELOB’S LAIR

727

Sam could reach him, he was off, running with amazing speed back
towards the tunnel.
Sword in hand Sam went after him. For the moment he had
forgotten everything else but the red fury in his brain and the desire
to kill Gollum. But before he could overtake him, Gollum was gone.
Then as the dark hole stood before him and the stench came out to
meet him, like a clap of thunder the thought of Frodo and the monster
smote upon Sam’s mind. He spun round, and rushed wildly up the
path, calling and calling his master’s name. He was too late. So far
Gollum’s plot had succeeded.

Chapter 10
THE CHOICES OF
MASTER SAMWISE
Frodo was lying face upward on the ground and the monster was
bending over him, so intent upon her victim that she took no heed
of Sam and his cries, until he was close at hand. As he rushed up he
saw that Frodo was already bound in cords, wound about him from
ankle to shoulder, and the monster with her great forelegs was beginning half to lift, half to drag his body away.
On the near side of him lay, gleaming on the ground, his elvenblade, where it had fallen useless from his grasp. Sam did not wait
to wonder what was to be done, or whether he was brave, or loyal,
or ﬁlled with rage. He sprang forward with a yell, and seized his
master’s sword in his left hand. Then he charged. No onslaught
more ﬁerce was ever seen in the savage world of beasts, where some
desperate small creature armed with little teeth, alone, will spring
upon a tower of horn and hide that stands above its fallen mate.
Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by his small yell she
turned slowly the dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But almost
before she was aware that a fury was upon her greater than any she
had known in countless years, the shining sword bit upon her foot
and shore away the claw. Sam sprang in, inside the arches of her
legs, and with a quick upthrust of his other hand stabbed at the
clustered eyes upon her lowered head. One great eye went dark.
Now the miserable creature was right under her, for the moment
out of the reach of her sting and of her claws. Her vast belly was
above him with its putrid light, and the stench of it almost smote
him down. Still his fury held for one more blow, and before she
could sink upon him, smothering him and all his little impudence of
courage, he slashed the bright elven-blade across her with desperate
strength.
But Shelob was not as dragons are, no softer spot had she save
only her eyes. Knobbed and pitted with corruption was her age-old
hide, but ever thickened from within with layer on layer of evil growth.
The blade scored it with a dreadful gash, but those hideous folds
could not be pierced by any strength of men, not though Elf or Dwarf
should forge the steel or the hand of Beren or of Túrin wield it. She
yielded to the stroke, and then heaved up the great bag of her belly
high above Sam’s head. Poison frothed and bubbled from the wound.

THE CHOICES OF MASTER SAMWISE

729

Now splaying her legs she drove her huge bulk down on him again.
Too soon. For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping his own
sword, with both hands he held the elven-blade point upwards, fending off that ghastly roof; and so Shelob, with the driving force of her
own cruel will, with strength greater than any warrior’s hand, thrust
herself upon a bitter spike. Deep, deep it pricked, as Sam was crushed
slowly to the ground.
No such anguish had Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing,
in all her long world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old
Gondor, nor the most savage Orc entrapped, had ever thus endured
her, or set blade to her beloved ﬂesh. A shudder went through her.
Heaving up again, wrenching away from the pain, she bent her writhing limbs beneath her and sprang backwards in a convulsive leap.
Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo’s head, his senses reeling in
the foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword.
Through the mist before his eyes he was aware dimly of Frodo’s face,
and stubbornly he fought to master himself and to drag himself out
of the swoon that was upon him. Slowly he raised his head and saw
her, only a few paces away, eyeing him, her beak drabbling a spittle
of venom, and a green ooze trickling from below her wounded eye.
There she crouched, her shuddering belly splayed upon the ground,
the great bows of her legs quivering, as she gathered herself for
another spring – this time to crush and sting to death: no little bite
of poison to still the struggling of her meat; this time to slay and then
to rend.
Even as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing his death in
her eyes, a thought came to him, as if some remote voice had spoken,
and he fumbled in his breast with his left hand, and found what he
sought: cold and hard and solid it seemed to his touch in a phantom
world of horror, the Phial of Galadriel.
‘Galadriel!’ he said faintly, and then he heard voices far off but
clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in the
beloved shadows of the Shire, and the music of the Elves as it came
through his sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond.
Gilthoniel A Elbereth!
And then his tongue was loosed and his voice cried in a language
which he did not know:
A Elbereth Gilthoniel
o menel palan-diriel,
le nallon sı́ di’nguruthos!
A tiro nin, Fanuilos!

730

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

And with that he staggered to his feet and was Samwise the hobbit,
Hamfast’s son, again.
‘Now come, you ﬁlth!’ he cried. ‘You’ve hurt my master, you
brute, and you’ll pay for it. We’re going on; but we’ll settle with you
ﬁrst. Come on, and taste it again!’
As if his indomitable spirit had set its potency in motion, the glass
blazed suddenly like a white torch in his hand. It ﬂamed like a star
that leaping from the ﬁrmament sears the dark air with intolerable
light. No such terror out of heaven had ever burned in Shelob’s face
before. The beams of it entered into her wounded head and scored
it with unbearable pain, and the dreadful infection of light spread
from eye to eye. She fell back beating the air with her forelegs, her
sight blasted by inner lightnings, her mind in agony. Then turning
her maimed head away, she rolled aside and began to crawl, claw by
claw, towards the opening in the dark cliff behind.
Sam came on. He was reeling like a drunken man, but he came
on. And Shelob cowed at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivered
as she tried to hasten from him. She reached the hole, and squeezing
down, leaving a trail of green-yellow slime, she slipped in, even as
Sam hewed a last stroke at her dragging legs. Then he fell to the
ground.
Shelob was gone; and whether she lay long in her lair, nursing her
malice and her misery, and in slow years of darkness healed herself
from within, rebuilding her clustered eyes, until with hunger like
death she spun once more her dreadful snares in the glens of the
Mountains of Shadow, this tale does not tell.
Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening of the Nameless Land
fell upon the place of battle, he crawled back to his master.
‘Master, dear master,’ he said, but Frodo did not speak. As he
had run forward, eager, rejoicing to be free, Shelob with hideous
speed had come behind and with one swift stroke had stung him in
the neck. He lay now pale, and heard no voice, and did not move.
‘Master, dear master!’ said Sam, and through a long silence waited,
listening in vain.
Then as quickly as he could he cut away the binding cords and
laid his head upon Frodo’s breast and to his mouth, but no stir of
life could he ﬁnd, nor feel the faintest ﬂutter of the heart. Often he
chafed his master’s hands and feet, and touched his brow, but all
were cold.
‘Frodo, Mr. Frodo!’ he called. ‘Don’t leave me here alone! It’s
your Sam calling. Don’t go where I can’t follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo!
O wake up, Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!’
*
*
*

THE CHOICES OF MASTER SAMWISE

731

Then anger surged over him, and he ran about his master’s body
in a rage, stabbing the air, and smiting the stones, and shouting
challenges. Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo’s
face, pale beneath him in the dusk. And suddenly he saw that he was
in the picture that was revealed to him in the mirror of Galadriel in
Lórien: Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark
cliff. Or fast asleep he had thought then. ‘He’s dead!’ he said. ‘Not
asleep, dead!’ And as he said it, as if the words had set the venom
to its work again, it seemed to him that the hue of the face grew livid
green.
And then black despair came down on him, and Sam bowed to
the ground, and drew his grey hood over his head, and night came
into his heart, and he knew no more.
When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows
were about him; but for how many minutes or hours the world had
gone dragging on he could not tell. He was still in the same place,
and still his master lay beside him dead. The mountains had not
crumbled nor the earth fallen into ruin.
‘What shall I do, what shall I do?’ he said. ‘Did I come all this
way with him for nothing?’ And then he remembered his own voice
speaking words that at the time he did not understand himself, at
the beginning of their journey: I have something to do before the end. I
must see it through, sir, if you understand.
‘But what can I do? Not leave Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on the
top of the mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on?’ he repeated,
and for a moment doubt and fear shook him. ‘Go on? Is that what
I’ve got to do? And leave him?’
Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed
his body, and folded his cold hands upon his breast, and wrapped
his cloak about him; and he laid his own sword at one side, and the
staff that Faramir had given at the other.
‘If I’m to go on,’ he said, ‘then I must take your sword, by your
leave, Mr. Frodo, but I’ll put this one to lie by you, as it lay by the
old king in the barrow; and you’ve got your beautiful mithril coat
from old Mr. Bilbo. And your star-glass, Mr. Frodo, you did lend it
to me and I’ll need it, for I’ll be always in the dark now. It’s too good
for me, and the Lady gave it to you, but maybe she’d understand. Do
you understand, Mr. Frodo? I’ve got to go on.’
But he could not go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo’s hand and
could not release it. And time went by and still he knelt, holding his
master’s hand, and in his heart keeping a debate.
Now he tried to ﬁnd strength to tear himself away and go on a

732

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

lonely journey – for vengeance. If once he could go, his anger would
bear him down all the roads of the world, pursuing, until he had him
at last: Gollum. Then Gollum would die in a corner. But that was
not what he had set out to do. It would not be worth while to leave
his master for that. It would not bring him back. Nothing would.
They had better both be dead together. And that too would be a
lonely journey.
He looked on the bright point of the sword. He thought of the
places behind where there was a black brink and an empty fall into
nothingness. There was no escape that way. That was to do nothing,
not even to grieve. That was not what he had set out to do. ‘What
am I to do then?’ he cried again, and now he seemed plainly to know
the hard answer: see it through. Another lonely journey, and the worst.
‘What? Me, alone, go to the Crack of Doom and all?’ He quailed
still, but the resolve grew. ‘What? Me take the Ring from him? The
Council gave it to him.’
But the answer came at once: ‘And the Council gave him companions, so that the errand should not fail. And you are the last of
all the Company. The errand must not fail.’
‘I wish I wasn’t the last,’ he groaned. ‘I wish old Gandalf was here,
or somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind? I’m sure
to go wrong. And it’s not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself
forward.’
‘But you haven’t put yourself forward; you’ve been put forward.
And as for not being the right and proper person, why, Mr. Frodo
wasn’t, as you might say, nor Mr. Bilbo. They didn’t choose themselves.’
‘Ah well, I must make up my own mind. I will make it up. But
I’ll be sure to go wrong: that’d be Sam Gamgee all over.
‘Let me see now: if we’re found here, or Mr. Frodo’s found, and
that Thing’s on him, well, the Enemy will get it. And that’s the end
of all of us, of Lórien, and Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And
there’s no time to lose, or it’ll be the end anyway. The war’s begun,
and more than likely things are all going the Enemy’s way already.
No chance to go back with It and get advice or permission. No, it’s
sit here till they come and kill me over master’s body, and gets It;
or take It and go.’ He drew a deep breath. ‘Then take It, it is!’
He stooped. Very gently he undid the clasp at the neck and slipped
his hand inside Frodo’s tunic; then with his other hand raising the
head, he kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over it.
And then the head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came
over the still face, and by that more than by all other tokens Sam
was convinced at last that Frodo had died and laid aside the Quest.

THE CHOICES OF MASTER SAMWISE

733

‘Good-bye, master, my dear!’ he murmured. ‘Forgive your Sam.
He’ll come back to this spot when the job’s done – if he manages it.
And then he’ll not leave you again. Rest you quiet till I come; and
may no foul creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear
me and give me one wish, I would wish to come back and ﬁnd you
again. Good-bye!’
And then he bent his own neck and put the chain upon it, and at
once his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of the Ring,
as if a great stone had been strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight
became less, or new strength grew in him, he raised his head, and
then with a great effort got to his feet and found that he could walk
and bear his burden. And for a moment he lifted up the Phial and
looked down at his master, and the light burned gently now with the
soft radiance of the evening-star in summer, and in that light Frodo’s
face was fair of hue again, pale but beautiful with an Elvish beauty,
as of one who has long passed the shadows. And with the bitter
comfort of that last sight Sam turned and hid the light and stumbled
on into the growing dark.
He had not far to go. The tunnel was some way behind; the Cleft
a couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in the
dusk, a deep rut worn in ages of passage, running now gently up in
a long trough with cliffs on either side. The trough narrowed rapidly.
Soon Sam came to a long ﬂight of broad shallow steps. Now the
orc-tower was right above him, frowning black, and in it the red eye
glowed. Now he was hidden in the dark shadow under it. He was
coming to the top of the steps and was in the Cleft at last.
‘I’ve made up my mind,’ he kept saying to himself. But he had
not. Though he had done his best to think it out, what he was doing
was altogether against the grain of his nature. ‘Have I got it wrong?’
he muttered. ‘What ought I to have done?’
As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached
the actual summit, before he looked at last on the path descending
into the Nameless Land, he turned. For a moment, motionless in
intolerable doubt, he looked back. He could still see, like a small blot
in the gathering gloom, the mouth of the tunnel; and he thought he
could see or guess where Frodo lay. He fancied there was a glimmer
on the ground down there, or perhaps it was some trick of his tears,
as he peered out at that high stony place where all his life had fallen
in ruin.
‘If only I could have my wish, my one wish,’ he sighed, ‘to go back
and ﬁnd him!’ Then at last he turned to the road in front and took a
few steps: the heaviest and the most reluctant he had ever taken.
*
*
*

734

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Only a few steps; and now only a few more and he would be going
down and would never see that high place again. And then suddenly
he heard cries and voices. He stood still as stone. Orc-voices. They
were behind him and before him. A noise of tramping feet and harsh
shouts: Orcs were coming up to the Cleft from the far side, from
some entry to the tower, perhaps. Tramping feet and shouts behind.
He wheeled round. He saw small red lights, torches, winking away
below there as they issued from the tunnel. At last the hunt was up.
The red eye of the tower had not been blind. He was caught.
Now the ﬂicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead
was very near. In a minute they would reach the top and be on him.
He had taken too long in making up his mind, and now it was no
good. How could he escape, or save himself, or save the Ring? The
Ring. He was not aware of any thought or decision. He simply found
himself drawing out the chain and taking the Ring in his hand. The
head of the orc-company appeared in the Cleft right before him.
Then he put it on.
The world changed, and a single moment of time was ﬁlled with
an hour of thought. At once he was aware that hearing was sharpened
while sight was dimmed, but otherwise than in Shelob’s lair. All
things about him now were not dark but vague; while he himself was
there in a grey hazy world, alone, like a small black solid rock, and
the Ring, weighing down his left hand, was like an orb of hot gold.
He did not feel invisible at all, but horribly and uniquely visible; and
he knew that somewhere an Eye was searching for him.
He heard the crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in
Morgul Vale; and down away under the rock the bubbling misery of
Shelob, groping, lost in some blind passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the cries of the Orcs as they came out of the
tunnel; and deafening, roaring in his ears, the crash of the feet and
the rending clamour of the Orcs before him. He shrank against the
cliff. But they marched up like a phantom company, grey distorted
ﬁgures in a mist, only dreams of fear with pale ﬂames in their hands.
And they passed him by. He cowered, trying to creep away into some
cranny and to hide.
He listened. The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching
down had sighted one another, and both parties were now hurrying
and shouting. He heard them both clearly, and he understood what
they said. Perhaps the Ring gave understanding of tongues, or simply
understanding, especially of the servants of Sauron its maker, so that
if he gave heed, he understood and translated the thought to himself.
Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in power as it approached the
places of its forging; but one thing it did not confer, and that was

THE CHOICES OF MASTER SAMWISE

735

courage. At present Sam still thought only of hiding, of lying low till
all was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He could not tell how
near the voices were, the words seemed almost in his ears.
‘Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war
already?’
‘Orders, you lubber. And what are you doing, Shagrat? Tired of
lurking up there? Thinking of coming down to ﬁght?’
‘Orders to you. I’m in command of this pass. So speak civil. What’s
your report?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Hai! hai! yoi!’ A yell broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The
Orcs lower down had suddenly seen something. They began to run.
So did the others.
‘Hai! Hola! Here’s something! Lying right in the road. A spy, a
spy!’ There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.
With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from his cowering mood.
They had seen his master. What would they do? He had heard tales
of the Orcs to make the blood run cold. It could not be borne. He
sprang up. He ﬂung the Quest and all his decisions away, and fear
and doubt with them. He knew now where his place was and had
been: at his master’s side, though what he could do there was not
clear. Back he ran down the steps, down the path towards Frodo.
‘How many are there?’ he thought. ‘Thirty or forty from the tower
at least, and a lot more than that from down below, I guess. How
many can I kill before they get me? They’ll see the ﬂame of the sword,
as soon as I draw it, and they’ll get me sooner or later. I wonder if
any song will ever mention it: How Samwise fell in the High Pass
and made a wall of bodies round his master. No, no song. Of course
not, for the Ring’ll be found, and there’ll be no more songs. I can’t
help it. My place is by Mr. Frodo. They must understand that –
Elrond and the Council, and the great Lords and Ladies with all
their wisdom. Their plans have gone wrong. I can’t be their Ringbearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.’
But the Orcs were out of his dim sight now. He had had no time
to consider himself, but now he realized that he was weary, weary
almost to exhaustion: his legs would not carry him as he wished. He
was too slow. The path seemed miles long. Where had they all got
to in the mist?
There they were again! A good way ahead still. A cluster of ﬁgures
round something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be darting
this way and that, bent like dogs on a trail. He tried to make a spurt.

736

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Come on, Sam!’ he said, ‘or you’ll be too late again.’ He loosened
the sword in its sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then——
There was a wild clamour, hooting and laughing, as something
was lifted from the ground. ‘Ya hoi! Ya harri hoi! Up! Up!’
Then a voice shouted: ‘Now off ! The quick way. Back to the
Undergate! She’ll not trouble us tonight by all the signs.’ The whole
band of orc-ﬁgures began to move. Four in the middle were carrying
a body high on their shoulders. ‘Ya hoi!’
They had taken Frodo’s body. They were off. He could not catch
them up. Still he laboured on. The Orcs reached the tunnel and were
passing in. Those with the burden went ﬁrst, and behind them there
was a good deal of struggling and jostling. Sam came on. He drew
the sword, a ﬂicker of blue in his wavering hand, but they did not
see it. Even as he came panting up, the last of them vanished into
the black hole.
For a moment he stood, gasping, clutching his breast. Then he drew
his sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears.
‘Curse the ﬁlth!’ he said, and sprang after them into the darkness.
It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was
as if he had stepped out of a thin mist into a heavier fog. His weariness
was growing but his will hardened all the more. He thought he could
see the light of torches a little way ahead, but try as he would, he
could not catch them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and this tunnel
they knew well; for in spite of Shelob they were forced to use it often
as the swiftest way from the Dead City over the mountains. In what
far-off time the main tunnel and the great round pit had been made,
where Shelob had taken up her abode in ages past, they did not
know; but many byways they had themselves delved about it on either
side, so as to escape the lair in their goings to and fro on the business
of their masters. Tonight they did not intend to go far down, but were
hastening to ﬁnd a side-passage that led back to their watch-tower on
the cliff. Most of them were gleeful, delighted with what they had
found and seen, and as they ran they gabbled and yammered after
the fashion of their kind. Sam heard the noise of their harsh voices,
ﬂat and hard in the dead air, and he could distinguish two voices
from among all the rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The
captains of the two parties seemed to be bringing up the rear, debating
as they went.
‘Can’t you stop your rabble making such a racket, Shagrat?’
grunted the one. ‘We don’t want Shelob on us.’
‘Go on, Gorbag! Yours are making more than half the noise,’ said

THE CHOICES OF MASTER SAMWISE

737

the other. ‘But let the lads play! No need to worry about Shelob for
a bit, I reckon. She’s sat on a nail, it seems, and we shan’t cry about
that. Didn’t you see: a nasty mess all the way back to that cursed
crack of hers? If we’ve stopped it once, we’ve stopped it a hundred
times. So let ’em laugh. And we’ve struck a bit of luck at last: got
something that Lugbúrz wants.’
‘Lugbúrz wants it, eh? What is it, d’you think? Elvish it looked to
me, but undersized. What’s the danger in a thing like that?’
‘Don’t know till we’ve had a look.’
‘Oho! So they haven’t told you what to expect? They don’t tell us
all they know, do they? Not by half. But they can make mistakes,
even the Top Ones can.’
‘Sh, Gorbag!’ Shagrat’s voice was lowered, so that even with his
strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just catch what was said.
‘They may, but they’ve got eyes and ears everywhere; some among
my lot, as like as not. But there’s no doubt about it, they’re troubled
about something. The Nazgûl down below are, by your account; and
Lugbúrz is too. Something nearly slipped.’
‘Nearly, you say!’ said Gorbag.
‘All right,’ said Shagrat, ‘but we’ll talk of that later. Wait till we
get to the Under-way. There’s a place there where we can talk a bit,
while the lads go on.’
Shortly afterwards Sam saw the torches disappear. Then there was
a rumbling noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as he
could guess the Orcs had turned and gone into the very opening
which Frodo and he had tried and found blocked. It was still blocked.
There seemed to be a great stone in the way, but the Orcs had
got through somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other
side. They were still running along, deeper and deeper into the mountain, back towards the tower. Sam felt desperate. They were carrying
off his master’s body for some foul purpose and he could not follow.
He thrust and pushed at the block, and he threw himself against it,
but it did not yield. Then not far inside, or so he thought, he heard
the two captains’ voices talking again. He stood still listening for a
little, hoping perhaps to learn something useful. Perhaps Gorbag,
who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul, would come out, and he
could then slip in.
‘No, I don’t know,’ said Gorbag’s voice. ‘The messages go through
quicker than anything could ﬂy, as a rule. But I don’t enquire how
it’s done. Safest not to. Grr! Those Nazgûl give me the creeps. And
they skin the body off you as soon as look at you, and leave you all
cold in the dark on the other side. But He likes ’em; they’re His
favourites nowadays, so it’s no use grumbling. I tell you, it’s no game
serving down in the city.’

738

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘You should try being up here with Shelob for company,’ said
Shagrat.
‘I’d like to try somewhere where there’s none of ’em. But the war’s
on now, and when that’s over things may be easier.’
‘It’s going well, they say.’
‘They would,’ grunted Gorbag. ‘We’ll see. But anyway, if it does
go well, there should be a lot more room. What d’you say? – if we
get a chance, you and me’ll slip off and set up somewhere on our
own with a few trusty lads, somewhere where there’s good loot nice
and handy, and no big bosses.’
‘Ah!’ said Shagrat. ‘Like old times.’
‘Yes,’ said Gorbag. ‘But don’t count on it. I’m not easy in my
mind. As I said, the Big Bosses, ay,’ his voice sank almost to a
whisper, ‘ay, even the Biggest, can make mistakes. Something nearly
slipped, you say. I say, something has slipped. And we’ve got to look
out. Always the poor Uruks to put slips right, and small thanks. But
don’t forget: the enemies don’t love us any more than they love Him,
and if they get topsides on Him, we’re done too. But see here: when
were you ordered out?’
‘About an hour ago, just before you saw us. A message came:
Nazgûl uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to head
of Stairs. I came at once.’
‘Bad business,’ said Gorbag. ‘See here – our Silent Watchers were
uneasy more than two days ago, that I know. But my patrol wasn’t
ordered out for another day, nor any message sent to Lugbúrz either:
owing to the Great Signal going up, and the High Nazgûl going off
to the war, and all that. And then they couldn’t get Lugbúrz to pay
attention for a good while, I’m told.’
‘The Eye was busy elsewhere, I suppose,’ said Shagrat. ‘Big things
going on away west, they say.’
‘I daresay,’ growled Gorbag. ‘But in the meantime enemies have
got up the Stairs. And what were you up to? You’re supposed to
keep watch, aren’t you, special orders or no? What are you for?’
‘That’s enough! Don’t try and teach me my job. We were awake
all right. We knew there were funny things going on.’
‘Very funny!’
‘Yes, very funny: lights and shouting and all. But Shelob was on
the go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.’
‘Her Sneak? What’s that?’
‘You must have seen him: little thin black fellow; like a spider
himself, or perhaps more like a starved frog. He’s been here before.
Came out of Lugbúrz the ﬁrst time, years ago, and we had word from
High Up to let him pass. He’s been up the Stairs once or twice since
then, but we’ve left him alone: seems to have some understanding

THE CHOICES OF MASTER SAMWISE

739

with Her Ladyship. I suppose he’s no good to eat: she wouldn’t worry
about words from High Up. But a ﬁne guard you keep in the valley:
he was up here a day before all this racket. Early last night we saw
him. Anyway my lads reported that Her Ladyship was having some
fun, and that seemed good enough for me, until the message came.
I thought her Sneak had brought her a toy, or that you’d perhaps
sent her a present, a prisoner of war or something. I don’t interfere
when she’s playing. Nothing gets by Shelob when she’s on the hunt.’
‘Nothing, say you! Didn’t you use your eyes back there? I tell you
I’m not easy in my mind. Whatever came up the Stairs, did get by.
It cut her web and got clean out of the hole. That’s something to
think about!’
‘Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn’t she?’
‘Got him? Got who? This little fellow? But if he was the only one,
then she’d have had him off to her larder long before, and there he’d
be now. And if Lugbúrz wanted him, you’d have to go and get him.
Nice for you. But there was more than one.’
At this point Sam began to listen more attentively and pressed his
ear against the stone.
‘Who cut the cords she’d put round him, Shagrat? Same one as
cut the web. Didn’t you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her
Ladyship? Same one, I reckon. And where is he? Where is he,
Shagrat?’
Shagrat made no reply.
‘You may well put your thinking cap on, if you’ve got one. It’s no
laughing matter. No one, no one has ever stuck a pin in Shelob before,
as you should know well enough. There’s no grief in that; but think
– there’s someone loose hereabouts as is more dangerous than any
other damned rebel that ever walked since the bad old times, since
the Great Siege. Something has slipped.’
‘And what is it then?’ growled Shagrat.
‘By all the signs, Captain Shagrat, I’d say there’s a large warrior
loose, Elf most likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an axe as well
maybe; and he’s loose in your bounds, too, and you’ve never spotted
him. Very funny indeed!’ Gorbag spat. Sam smiled grimly at this
description of himself.
‘Ah well, you always did take a gloomy view,’ said Shagrat. ‘You
can read the signs how you like, but there may be other ways to
explain them. Anyhow, I’ve got watchers at every point, and I’m
going to deal with one thing at a time. When I’ve had a look at the
fellow we have caught, then I’ll begin to worry about something
else.’
‘It’s my guess you won’t ﬁnd much in that little fellow,’ said
Gorbag. ‘He may have had nothing to do with the real mischief. The

740

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

big fellow with the sharp sword doesn’t seem to have thought him
worth much anyhow – just left him lying: regular Elvish trick.’
‘We’ll see. Come on now! We’ve talked enough. Let’s go and have
a look at the prisoner!’
‘What are you going to do with him? Don’t forget I spotted him
ﬁrst. If there’s any game, me and my lads must be in it.’
‘Now, now,’ growled Shagrat, ‘I have my orders. And it’s more
than my belly’s worth, or yours, to break ’em. Any trespasser found
by the guard is to be held at the tower. Prisoner is to be stripped.
Full description of every article, garment, weapon, letter, ring, or
trinket is to be sent to Lugbúrz at once, and to Lugbúrz only. And
the prisoner is to be kept safe and intact, under pain of death for
every member of the guard, until He sends or comes Himself. That’s
plain enough, and that’s what I’m going to do.’
‘Stripped, eh?’ said Gorbag. ‘What, teeth, nails, hair, and all?’
‘No, none of that. He’s for Lugbúrz, I tell you. He’s wanted safe
and whole.’
‘You’ll ﬁnd that difﬁcult,’ laughed Gorbag. ‘He’s nothing but carrion now. What Lugbúrz will do with such stuff I can’t guess. He
might as well go in the pot.’
‘You fool,’ snarled Shagrat. ‘You’ve been talking very clever, but
there’s a lot you don’t know, though most other folk do. You’ll be
for the pot or for Shelob, if you don’t take care. Carrion! Is that all
you know of Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords, she’s after
meat. She doesn’t eat dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow
isn’t dead!’
Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if the whole dark
world was turning upside down. So great was the shock that he almost
swooned, but even as he fought to keep a hold on his senses, deep
inside him he was aware of the comment: ‘You fool, he isn’t dead,
and your heart knew it. Don’t trust your head, Samwise, it is not the
best part of you. The trouble with you is that you never really had
any hope. Now what is to be done?’ For the moment nothing, but
to prop himself against the unmoving stone and listen, listen to the
vile orc-voices.
‘Garn!’ said Shagrat. ‘She’s got more than one poison. When she’s
hunting, she just gives ’em a dab in the neck and they go as limp as
boned ﬁsh, and then she has her way with them. D’you remember
old Ufthak? We lost him for days. Then we found him in a corner;
hanging up he was, but he was wide awake and glaring. How we
laughed! She’d forgotten him, maybe, but we didn’t touch him – no
good interfering with Her. Nar – this little ﬁlth, he’ll wake up, in a

THE CHOICES OF MASTER SAMWISE

741

few hours; and beyond feeling a bit sick for a bit, he’ll be all right.
Or would be, if Lugbúrz would let him alone. And of course, beyond
wondering where he is and what’s happened to him.’
‘And what’s going to happen to him,’ laughed Gorbag. ‘We can
tell him a few stories at any rate, if we can’t do anything else. I don’t
suppose he’s ever been in lovely Lugbúrz, so he may like to know
what to expect. This is going to be more funny than I thought. Let’s
go!’
‘There’s going to be no fun, I tell you,’ said Shagrat. ‘And he’s
got to be kept safe, or we’re all as good as dead.’
‘All right! But if I were you, I’d catch the big one that’s loose,
before you send in any report to Lugbúrz. It won’t sound too pretty
to say you’ve caught the kitten and let the cat escape.’
The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet
receding. He was recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury
was on him. ‘I got it all wrong!’ he cried. ‘I knew I would. Now
they’ve got him, the devils! the ﬁlth! Never leave your master, never,
never: that was my right rule. And I knew it in my heart. May I be
forgiven! Now I’ve got to get back to him. Somehow, somehow!’
He drew his sword again and beat on the stone with the hilt, but
it only gave out a dull sound. The sword, however, blazed so brightly
now that he could see dimly in its light. To his surprise he noticed
that the great block was shaped like a heavy door, and was less than
twice his own height. Above it was a dark blank space between the
top and the low arch of the opening. It was probably only meant to
be a stop against the intrusion of Shelob, fastened on the inside with
some latch or bolt beyond the reach of her cunning. With his remaining strength Sam leaped and caught the top, scrambled up, and
dropped; and then he ran madly, sword blazing in hand, round a
bend and up a winding tunnel.
The news that his master was still alive roused him to a last effort
beyond thought of weariness. He could not see anything ahead, for
this new passage twisted and turned constantly; but he thought he
was catching the two Orcs up: their voices were growing nearer again.
Now they seemed quite close.
‘That’s what I’m going to do,’ said Shagrat in angry tones. ‘Put
him right up in the top chamber.’
‘What for?’ growled Gorbag. ‘Haven’t you any lock-ups down
below?’
‘He’s going out of harm’s way, I tell you,’ answered Shagrat. ‘See?
He’s precious. I don’t trust all my lads, and none of yours; nor you
neither, when you’re mad for fun. He’s going where I want him, and

742

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

where you won’t come, if you don’t keep civil. Up to the top, I say.
He’ll be safe there.’
‘Will he?’ said Sam. ‘You’re forgetting the great big Elvish warrior
that’s loose!’ And with that he raced round the last corner, only to
ﬁnd that by some trick of the tunnel, or of the hearing which the
Ring gave him, he had misjudged the distance.
The two orc-ﬁgures were still some way ahead. He could see them
now, black and squat against a red glare. The passage ran straight at
last, up an incline; and at the end, wide open, were great double
doors, leading probably to deep chambers far below the high horn
of the tower. Already the Orcs with their burden had passed inside.
Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing near the gate.
Sam heard a burst of hoarse singing, blaring of horns and banging
of gongs, a hideous clamour. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on
the threshold.
Sam yelled and brandished Sting, but his little voice was drowned
in the tumult. No one heeded him.
The great doors slammed to. Boom. The bars of iron fell into
place inside. Clang. The gate was shut. Sam hurled himself against
the bolted brazen plates and fell senseless to the ground. He was out
in the darkness. Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy.

792

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

days he had jogged up and down, over passes, and through long dales,
and across many streams. Sometimes where the way was broader he
had ridden at the king’s side, not noticing that many of the Riders
smiled to see the two together: the hobbit on his little shaggy grey
pony, and the Lord of Rohan on his great white horse. Then he had
talked to Théoden, telling him about his home and the doings of the
Shire-folk, or listening in turn to tales of the Mark and its mighty
men of old. But most of the time, especially on this last day, Merry
had ridden by himself just behind the king, saying nothing, and trying
to understand the slow sonorous speech of Rohan that he heard the
men behind him using. It was a language in which there seemed to
be many words that he knew, though spoken more richly and strongly
than in the Shire, yet he could not piece the words together. At times
some Rider would lift up his clear voice in stirring song, and Merry
felt his heart leap, though he did not know what it was about.
All the same he had been lonely, and never more so than now at
the day’s end. He wondered where in all this strange world Pippin
had got to; and what would become of Aragorn and Legolas and
Gimli. Then suddenly like a cold touch on his heart he thought of
Frodo and Sam. ‘I am forgetting them!’ he said to himself reproachfully. ‘And yet they are more important than all the rest of us. And
I came to help them; but now they must be hundreds of miles away,
if they are still alive.’ He shivered.
´
‘Harrowdale at last!’ said Eomer.
‘Our journey is almost at an
end.’ They halted. The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply.
Only a glimpse, as through a tall window, could be seen of the great
valley in the gloaming below. A single small light could be seen
twinkling by the river.
‘This journey is over, maybe,’ said Théoden, ‘but I have far yet
to go. Two nights ago the moon was full, and in the morning I shall
ride to Edoras to the gathering of the Mark.’
´
‘But if you would take my counsel,’ said Eomer
in a low voice,
‘you would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.’
Théoden smiled. ‘Nay, my son, for so I will call you, speak not
the soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears!’ He drew himself up
and looked back at the long line of his men fading into the dusk
behind. ‘Long years in the space of days it seems since I rode west;
but never will I lean on a staff again. If the war is lost, what good
will be my hiding in the hills? And if it is won, what grief will it be,
even if I fall, spending my last strength? But we will leave this now.
Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow. One evening of peace
at least is left us. Let us ride on!’
*
*
*

796

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Tell me, did he speak of that road?’ He pointed away along the
darkening lines of stones towards the Dwimorberg. ‘Of the Paths of
the Dead?’
´
‘Yes, lord,’ said Eowyn.
‘And he has passed into the shadow from
which none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.’
´
‘Then our paths are sundered,’ said Eomer.
‘He is lost. We must
ride without him, and our hope dwindles.’
Slowly they passed through the short heath and upland grass,
speaking no more, until they came to the king’s pavilion. There Merry
found that everything was made ready, and that he himself was not
forgotten. A little tent had been pitched for him beside the king’s
lodging; and there he sat alone, while men passed to and fro, going
in to the king and taking counsel with him. Night came on and the
half-seen heads of the mountains westward were crowned with stars,
but the East was dark and blank. The marching stones faded slowly
from sight, but still beyond them, blacker than the gloom, brooded
the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg.
‘The Paths of the Dead,’ he muttered to himself. ‘The Paths of
the Dead? What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They
have all gone to some doom: Gandalf and Pippin to war in the East;
and Sam and Frodo to Mordor; and Strider and Legolas and Gimli
to the Paths of the Dead. But my turn will come soon enough, I
suppose. I wonder what they are all talking about, and what the king
means to do. For I must go where he goes now.’
In the midst of these gloomy thoughts he suddenly remembered
that he was very hungry, and he got up to go and see if anyone else
in this strange camp felt the same. But at that very moment a trumpet
sounded, and a man came summoning him, the king’s esquire, to
wait at the king’s board.
In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space, curtained off
with broidered hangings, and strewn with skins; and there at a small
´
´
table sat Théoden with Eomer
and Eowyn,
and Dúnhere, lord of
Harrowdale. Merry stood beside the king’s stool and waited on him,
till presently the old man, coming out of deep thought, turned to
him and smiled.
‘Come, Master Meriadoc!’ he said. ‘You shall not stand. You shall
sit beside me, as long as I remain in my own lands, and lighten my
heart with tales.’
Room was made for the hobbit at the king’s left hand, but no one
called for any tale. There was indeed little speech, and they ate and
drank for the most part in silence, until at last, plucking up courage,
Merry asked the question that was tormenting him.

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

811

catching his strange voice among the clamour of the men of the City,
turned and looked down at him and was amazed.
‘Whence come you?’ he said. ‘A halﬂing, and in the livery of the
Tower! Whence...?’
But with that Gandalf stepped to his side and spoke. ‘He came
with me from the land of the Halﬂings,’ he said. ‘He came with me.
But let us not tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you
are weary. He shall come with us. Indeed he must, for if he does not
forget his new duties more easily than I do, he must attend on his
lord again within this hour. Come, Pippin, follow us!’
So at length they came to the private chamber of the Lord of the
City. There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal; and wine
was brought; and there Pippin, hardly noticed, stood behind the chair
of Denethor and felt his weariness little, so eagerly did he listen to
all that was said.
When Faramir had taken white bread and drunk a draught of
wine, he sat upon a low chair at his father’s left hand. Removed a
little upon the other side sat Gandalf in a chair of carven wood; and
he seemed at ﬁrst to be asleep. For at the beginning Faramir spoke
only of the errand upon which he had been sent out ten days before,
and he brought tidings of Ithilien and of movements of the Enemy
and his allies; and he told of the ﬁght on the road when the men of
Harad and their great beast were overthrown: a captain reporting to
his master such matters as had often been heard before, small things
of border-war that now seemed useless and petty, shorn of their
renown.
Then suddenly Faramir looked at Pippin. ‘But now we come to
strange matters,’ he said. ‘For this is not the ﬁrst halﬂing that I have
seen walking out of northern legends into the Southlands.’
At that Gandalf sat up and gripped the arms of his chair; but he
said nothing, and with a look stopped the exclamation on Pippin’s
lips. Denethor looked at their faces and nodded his head, as though in
sign that he had read much there before it was spoken. Slowly, while
the others sat silent and still, Faramir told his tale, with his eyes for
the most part on Gandalf, though now and again his glance strayed to
Pippin, as if to refresh his memory of others that he had seen.
As his story was unfolded of his meeting with Frodo and his servant
and of the events at Henneth Annûn, Pippin became aware that
Gandalf ’s hands were trembling as they clutched the carven wood.
White they seemed now and very old, and as he looked at them,
suddenly with a thrill of fear Pippin knew that Gandalf, Gandalf
himself, was troubled, even afraid. The air of the room was close and
still. At last when Faramir spoke of his parting with the travellers,

812

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and of their resolve to go to Cirith Ungol, his voice fell, and he shook
his head and sighed. Then Gandalf sprang up.
‘Cirith Ungol? Morgul Vale?’ he said. ‘The time, Faramir, the
time? When did you part with them? When would they reach that
accursed valley?’
‘I parted with them in the morning two days ago,’ said Faramir.
‘It is ﬁfteen leagues thence to the vale of the Morgulduin, if they
went straight south; and then they would be still ﬁve leagues westward
of the accursed Tower. At swiftest they could not come there before
today, and maybe they have not come there yet. Indeed I see what
you fear. But the darkness is not due to their venture. It began
yestereve, and all Ithilien was under shadow last night. It is clear to
me that the Enemy has long planned an assault on us, and its hour had
already been determined before ever the travellers left my keeping.’
Gandalf paced the ﬂoor. ‘The morning of two days ago, nigh on
three days of journey! How far is the place where you parted?’
‘Some twenty-ﬁve leagues as a bird ﬂies,’ answered Faramir. ‘But
I could not come more swiftly. Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the
long isle in the River northward which we hold in defence; and horses
are kept on the hither bank. As the dark drew on I knew that haste
was needed, so I rode thence with three others that could also be
horsed. The rest of my company I sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath. I hope that I have not done ill?’ He
looked at his father.
‘Ill?’ cried Denethor, and his eyes ﬂashed suddenly. ‘Why do you
ask? The men were under your command. Or do you ask for my
judgement on all your deeds? Your bearing is lowly in my presence,
yet it is long now since you turned from your own way at my counsel.
See, you have spoken skilfully, as ever; but I, have I not seen your
eye ﬁxed on Mithrandir, seeking whether you said well or too much?
He has long had your heart in his keeping.
‘My son, your father is old but not yet dotard. I can see and hear,
as was my wont; and little of what you have half said or left unsaid
is now hidden from me. I know the answer to many riddles. Alas,
alas for Boromir!’
‘If what I have done displeases you, my father,’ said Faramir
quietly, ‘I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so
weighty a judgement was thrust on me.’
‘Would that have availed to change your judgement?’ said
Denethor. ‘You would still have done just so, I deem. I know you
well. Ever your desire is to appear lordly and generous as a king of
old, gracious, gentle. That may well beﬁt one of high race, if he sits
in power and peace. But in desperate hours gentleness may be repaid
with death.’

THE SIEGE OF GONDOR

815

with Pippin beside him bearing a small torch, made his way to their
lodging. They did not speak until they were behind closed doors.
Then at last Pippin took Gandalf ’s hand.
‘Tell me,’ he said, ‘is there any hope? For Frodo, I mean; or at
least mostly for Frodo.’
Gandalf put his hand on Pippin’s head. ‘There never was much
hope,’ he answered. ‘Just a fool’s hope, as I have been told. And
when I heard of Cirith Ungol——’ He broke off and strode to the
window, as if his eyes could pierce the night in the East. ‘Cirith
Ungol!’ he muttered. ‘Why that way, I wonder?’ He turned. ‘Just
now, Pippin, my heart almost failed me, hearing that name. And yet in
truth I believe that the news that Faramir brings has some hope in it.
For it seems clear that our Enemy has opened his war at last and made
the ﬁrst move while Frodo was still free. So now for many days he will
have his eye turned this way and that, away from his own land. And
yet, Pippin, I feel from afar his haste and fear. He has begun sooner
than he would. Something has happened to stir him.’
Gandalf stood for a moment in thought. ‘Maybe,’ he muttered.
‘Maybe even your foolishness helped, my lad. Let me see: some ﬁve
days ago now he would discover that we had thrown down Saruman,
and had taken the Stone. Still what of that? We could not use it to
much purpose, or without his knowing. Ah! I wonder. Aragorn? His
time draws near. And he is strong and stern underneath, Pippin;
bold, determined, able to take his own counsel and dare great risks
at need. That may be it. He may have used the Stone and shown
himself to the Enemy, challenging him, for this very purpose. I
wonder. Well, we shall not know the answer till the Riders of Rohan
come, if they do not come too late. There are evil days ahead. To
sleep while we may!’
‘But,’ said Pippin.
‘But what?’ said Gandalf. ‘Only one but will I allow tonight.’
‘Gollum,’ said Pippin. ‘How on earth could they be going about
with him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not
like the place he was taking them to any more than you do. What is
wrong?’
‘I cannot answer that now,’ said Gandalf. ‘Yet my heart guessed
that Frodo and Gollum would meet before the end. For good, or for
evil. But of Cirith Ungol I will not speak tonight. Treachery, treachery
I fear; treachery of that miserable creature. But so it must be. Let us
remember that a traitor may betray himself and do good that he does
not intend. It can be so, sometimes. Good night!’
The next day came with a morning like a brown dusk, and the
hearts of men, lifted for a while by the return of Faramir, sank low

THE BLACK GATE OPENS

889

king than a piece of Elvish glass, or a rabble such as this. Why, any
brigand of the hills can show as good a following!’
Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other’s eye and
held it, and for a moment they strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn
did not stir nor move hand to weapon, the other quailed and gave
back as if menaced with a blow. ‘I am a herald and ambassador, and
may not be assailed!’ he cried.
‘Where such laws hold,’ said Gandalf, ‘it is also the custom for
ambassadors to use less insolence. But no one has threatened you.
You have naught to fear from us, until your errand is done. But
unless your master has come to new wisdom, then with all his servants
you will be in great peril.’
‘So!’ said the Messenger. ‘Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard? Have we not heard of thee at whiles, and of thy wanderings,
ever hatching plots and mischief at a safe distance? But this time
thou hast stuck out thy nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt
see what comes to him who sets his foolish webs before the feet of
Sauron the Great. I have tokens that I was bidden to show to thee
– to thee in especial, if thou shouldst dare to come.’ He signed to
one of his guards, and he came forward bearing a bundle swathed
in black cloths.
The Messenger put these aside, and there to the wonder and
dismay of all the Captains he held up ﬁrst the short sword that Sam
had carried, and next a grey cloak with an elven-brooch, and last the
coat of mithril-mail that Frodo had worn wrapped in his tattered
garments. A blackness came before their eyes, and it seemed to them
in a moment of silence that the world stood still, but their hearts
were dead and their last hope gone. Pippin who stood behind Prince
Imrahil sprang forward with a cry of grief.
‘Silence!’ said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back; but the Messenger laughed aloud.
‘So you have yet another of these imps with you!’ he cried. ‘What
use you ﬁnd in them I cannot guess; but to send them as spies into
Mordor is beyond even your accustomed folly. Still, I thank him, for
it is plain that this brat at least has seen these tokens before, and it
would be vain for you to deny them now.’
‘I do not wish to deny them,’ said Gandalf. ‘Indeed, I know them
all and all their history, and despite your scorn, foul Mouth of Sauron,
you cannot say as much. But why do you bring them here?’
‘Dwarf-coat, elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from
the little rat-land of the Shire – nay, do not start! We know it well –
here are the marks of a conspiracy. Now, maybe he that bore these
things was a creature that you would not grieve to lose, and maybe
otherwise: one dear to you, perhaps? If so, take swift counsel with

Chapter 1
THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL
Sam roused himself painfully from the ground. For a moment he
wondered where he was, and then all the misery and despair returned
to him. He was in the deep dark outside the under-gate of the orcs’
stronghold; its brazen doors were shut. He must have fallen stunned
when he hurled himself against them; but how long he had lain there
he did not know. Then he had been on ﬁre, desperate and furious;
now he was shivering and cold. He crept to the doors and pressed
his ears against them.
Far within he could hear faintly the voices of orcs clamouring, but
soon they stopped or passed out of hearing, and all was still. His
head ached and his eyes saw phantom lights in the darkness, but he
struggled to steady himself and think. It was clear at any rate that he
had no hope of getting into the orc-hold by that gate; he might wait
there for days before it was opened, and he could not wait: time was
desperately precious. He no longer had any doubt about his duty:
he must rescue his master or perish in the attempt.
‘The perishing is more likely, and will be a lot easier anyway,’ he
said grimly to himself, as he sheathed Sting and turned from the
brazen doors. Slowly he groped his way back in the dark along the
tunnel, not daring to use the elven-light; and as he went he tried to
ﬁt together the events since Frodo and he had left the Cross-roads.
He wondered what the time was. Somewhere between one day and
the next, he supposed; but even of the days he had quite lost count.
He was in a land of darkness where the days of the world seemed
forgotten, and where all who entered were forgotten too.
‘I wonder if they think of us at all,’ he said, ‘and what is happening
to them all away there.’ He waved his hand vaguely in the air before
him; but he was in fact now facing southwards, as he came back to
Shelob’s tunnel, not west. Out westward in the world it was drawing
to noon upon the fourteenth day of March in the Shire-reckoning, and
even now Aragorn was leading the black ﬂeet from Pelargir, and Merry
was riding with the Rohirrim down the Stonewain Valley, while in
Minas Tirith ﬂames were rising and Pippin watched the madness growing in the eyes of Denethor. Yet amid all their cares and fear the
thoughts of their friends turned constantly to Frodo and Sam. They
were not forgotten. But they were far beyond aid, and no thought could
yet bring any help to Samwise Hamfast’s son; he was utterly alone.
*
*
*

898

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

He came back at last to the stone door of the orc-passage, and
still unable to discover the catch or bolt that held it, he scrambled
over as before and dropped softly to the ground. Then he made his
way stealthily to the outlet of Shelob’s tunnel, where the rags of her
great web were still blowing and swaying in the cold airs. For cold
they seemed to Sam after the noisome darkness behind; but the
breath of them revived him. He crept cautiously out.
All was ominously quiet. The light was no more than that of dusk
at a dark day’s end. The vast vapours that arose in Mordor and went
streaming westward passed low overhead, a great welter of cloud and
smoke now lit again beneath with a sullen glow of red.
Sam looked up towards the orc-tower, and suddenly from its narrow windows lights stared out like small red eyes. He wondered if
they were some signal. His fear of the orcs, forgotten for a while in
his wrath and desperation, now returned. As far as he could see,
there was only one possible course for him to take: he must go on
and try to ﬁnd the main entrance to the dreadful tower; but his knees
felt weak, and he found that he was trembling. Drawing his eyes
down from the tower and the horns of the Cleft before him, he forced
his unwilling feet to obey him, and slowly, listening with all his ears,
peering into the dense shadows of the rocks beside the way, he
retraced his steps, past the place where Frodo fell, and still the stench
of Shelob lingered, and then on and up, until he stood again in the very
cleft where he had put on the Ring and seen Shagrat’s company go by.
There he halted and sat down. For the moment he could drive
himself no further. He felt that if once he went beyond the crown of
the pass and took one step veritably down into the land of Mordor,
that step would be irrevocable. He could never come back. Without
any clear purpose he drew out the Ring and put it on again. Immediately he felt the great burden of its weight, and felt afresh, but now
more strong and urgent than ever, the malice of the Eye of Mordor,
searching, trying to pierce the shadows that it had made for its own
defence, but which now hindered it in its unquiet and doubt.
As before, Sam found that his hearing was sharpened, but that to
his sight the things of this world seemed thin and vague. The rocky
walls of the path were pale, as if seen through a mist, but still at a
distance he heard the bubbling of Shelob in her misery; and harsh
and clear, and very close it seemed, he heard cries and the clash of
metal. He sprang to his feet, and pressed himself against the wall
beside the road. He was glad of the Ring, for here was yet another
company of orcs on the march. Or so at ﬁrst he thought. Then
suddenly he realized that it was not so, his hearing had deceived him:
the orc-cries came from the tower, whose topmost horn was now
right above him, on the left hand of the Cleft.

THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL

899

Sam shuddered and tried to force himself to move. There was
plainly some devilry going on. Perhaps in spite of all orders the cruelty
of the orcs had mastered them, and they were tormenting Frodo, or
even savagely hacking him to pieces. He listened; and as he did so a
gleam of hope came to him. There could not be much doubt: there
was ﬁghting in the tower, the orcs must be at war among themselves,
Shagrat and Gorbag had come to blows. Faint as was the hope that
his guess brought him, it was enough to rouse him. There might be
just a chance. His love for Frodo rose above all other thoughts, and
forgetting his peril he cried aloud: ‘I’m coming, Mr. Frodo!’
He ran forward to the climbing path, and over it. At once the road
turned left and plunged steeply down. Sam had crossed into Mordor.
He took off the Ring, moved it may be by some deep premonition
of danger, though to himself he thought only that he wished to see
more clearly. ‘Better have a look at the worst,’ he muttered. ‘No
good blundering about in a fog!’
Hard and cruel and bitter was the land that met his gaze. Before
his feet the highest ridge of the Ephel Dúath fell steeply in great cliffs
down into a dark trough, on the further side of which there rose
another ridge, much lower, its edge notched and jagged with crags
like fangs that stood out black against the red light behind them: it
was the grim Morgai, the inner ring of the fences of the land. Far
beyond it, but almost straight ahead, across a wide lake of darkness
dotted with tiny ﬁres, there was a great burning glow; and from it
rose in huge columns a swirling smoke, dusty red at the roots, black
above where it merged into the billowing canopy that roofed in all
the accursed land.
Sam was looking at Orodruin, the Mountain of Fire. Ever and
anon the furnaces far below its ashen cone would grow hot and with
a great surging and throbbing pour forth rivers of molten rock from
chasms in its sides. Some would ﬂow blazing towards Barad-dûr
down great channels; some would wind their way into the stony plain,
until they cooled and lay like twisted dragon-shapes vomited from
the tormented earth. In such an hour of labour Sam beheld Mount
Doom, and the light of it, cut off by the high screen of the Ephel
Dúath from those who climbed up the path from the West, now
glared against the stark rock faces, so that they seemed to be drenched
with blood.
In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast, for now, looking to his
left, he could see the Tower of Cirith Ungol in all its strength. The
horn that he had seen from the other side was only its topmost turret.
Its eastern face stood up in three great tiers from a shelf in the
mountain-wall far below; its back was to a great cliff behind, from

900

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

which it jutted out in pointed bastions, one above the other, diminishing as they rose, with sheer sides of cunning masonry that looked
north-east and south-east. About the lowest tier, two hundred feet
below where Sam now stood, there was a battlemented wall enclosing
a narrow court. Its gate, upon the near south-eastern side, opened
on a broad road, the outer parapet of which ran upon the brink of a
precipice, until it turned southward and went winding down into the
darkness to join the road that came over the Morgul Pass. Then on
it went through a jagged rift in the Morgai out into the valley of
Gorgoroth and away to Barad-dûr. The narrow upper way on which
Sam stood leapt swiftly down by stair and steep path to meet the
main road under the frowning walls close to the Tower-gate.
As he gazed at it suddenly Sam understood, almost with a shock,
that this stronghold had been built not to keep enemies out of
Mordor, but to keep them in. It was indeed one of the works of
Gondor long ago, an eastern outpost of the defences of Ithilien, made
when, after the Last Alliance, Men of Westernesse kept watch on the
evil land of Sauron where his creatures still lurked. But as with Narchost and Carchost, the Towers of the Teeth, so here too the vigilance
had failed, and treachery had yielded up the Tower to the Lord of
the Ringwraiths, and now for long years it had been held by evil
things. Since his return to Mordor, Sauron had found it useful; for
he had few servants but many slaves of fear, and still its chief purpose
as of old was to prevent escape from Mordor. Though if an enemy
were so rash as to try to enter that land secretly, then it was also a
last unsleeping guard against any that might pass the vigilance of
Morgul and of Shelob.
Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for him to
creep down under those many-eyed walls and pass the watchful gate.
And even if he did so, he could not go far on the guarded road
beyond: not even the black shadows, lying deep where the red glow
could not reach, would shield him long from the night-eyed orcs.
But desperate as that road might be, his task was now far worse: not
to avoid the gate and escape, but to enter it, alone.
His thought turned to the Ring, but there was no comfort there,
only dread and danger. No sooner had he come in sight of Mount
Doom, burning far away, than he was aware of a change in his burden.
As it drew near the great furnaces where, in the deeps of time, it had
been shaped and forged, the Ring’s power grew, and it became more
fell, untameable save by some mighty will. As Sam stood there, even
though the Ring was not on him but hanging by its chain about his
neck, he felt himself enlarged, as if he were robed in a huge distorted
shadow of himself, a vast and ominous threat halted upon the walls

THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL

901

of Mordor. He felt that he had from now on only two choices: to
forbear the Ring, though it would torment him; or to claim it, and
challenge the Power that sat in its dark hold beyond the valley
of shadows. Already the Ring tempted him, gnawing at his will
and reason. Wild fantasies arose in his mind; and he saw Samwise
the Strong, Hero of the Age, striding with a ﬂaming sword across the
darkened land, and armies ﬂocking to his call as he marched to the
overthrow of Barad-dûr. And then all the clouds rolled away, and
the white sun shone, and at his command the vale of Gorgoroth
became a garden of ﬂowers and trees and brought forth fruit. He
had only to put on the Ring and claim it for his own, and all this
could be.
In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most
to hold him ﬁrm; but also deep down in him lived still unconquered
his plain hobbit-sense: he knew in the core of his heart that he was
not large enough to bear such a burden, even if such visions were
not a mere cheat to betray him. The one small garden of a free
gardener was all his need and due, not a garden swollen to a realm;
his own hands to use, not the hands of others to command.
‘And anyway all these notions are only a trick,’ he said to himself.
‘He’d spot me and cow me, before I could so much as shout out.
He’d spot me, pretty quick, if I put the Ring on now, in Mordor.
Well, all I can say is: things look as hopeless as a frost in Spring. Just
when being invisible would be really useful, I can’t use the Ring! And
if ever I get any further, it’s going to be nothing but a drag and a
burden every step. So what’s to be done?’
He was not really in any doubt. He knew that he must go down
to the gate and not linger any more. With a shrug of his shoulders,
as if to shake off the shadow and dismiss the phantoms, he began
slowly to descend. With each step he seemed to diminish. He had
not gone far before he had shrunk again to a very small and frightened
hobbit. He was now passing under the very walls of the Tower, and
the cries and sounds of ﬁghting could be heard with his unaided ears.
At the moment the noise seemed to be coming from the court behind
the outer wall.
Sam was about half way down the path when out of the dark
gateway into the red glow there came two orcs running. They did
not turn towards him. They were making for the main road; but even
as they ran they stumbled and fell to the ground and lay still. Sam
had seen no arrows, but he guessed that the orcs had been shot down
by others on the battlements or hidden in the shadow of the gate.
He went on, hugging the wall on his left. One look upward had
shown him that there was no hope of climbing it. The stone-work

902

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

rose thirty feet, without a crack or ledge, to overhanging courses like
inverted steps. The gate was the only way.
He crept on; and as he went he wondered how many orcs lived
in the Tower with Shagrat, and how many Gorbag had, and what they
were quarrelling about, if that was what was happening. Shagrat’s
company had seemed to be about forty, and Gorbag’s more than
twice as large; but of course Shagrat’s patrol had only been a part
of his garrison. Almost certainly they were quarrelling about Frodo,
and the spoil. For a second Sam halted, for suddenly things seemed
clear to him, almost as if he had seen them with his eyes. The
mithril coat! Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and they would ﬁnd
it. And from what Sam had heard Gorbag would covet it. But the
orders of the Dark Tower were at present Frodo’s only protection,
and if they were set aside, Frodo might be killed out of hand at any
moment.
‘Come on, you miserable sluggard!’ Sam cried to himself. ‘Now
for it!’ He drew Sting and ran towards the open gate. But just as he
was about to pass under its great arch he felt a shock: as if he had
run into some web like Shelob’s, only invisible. He could see no
obstacle, but something too strong for his will to overcome barred
the way. He looked about, and then within the shadow of the gate
he saw the Two Watchers.
They were like great ﬁgures seated upon thrones. Each had three
joined bodies, and three heads facing outward, and inward, and across
the gateway. The heads had vulture-faces, and on their great knees
were laid clawlike hands. They seemed to be carved out of huge
blocks of stone, immovable, and yet they were aware: some dreadful
spirit of evil vigilance abode in them. They knew an enemy. Visible
or invisible none could pass unheeded. They would forbid his entry,
or his escape.
Hardening his will Sam thrust forward once again, and halted with
a jerk, staggering as if from a blow upon his breast and head. Then
greatly daring, because he could think of nothing else to do, answering
a sudden thought that came to him, he drew slowly out the phial of
Galadriel and held it up. Its white light quickened swiftly, and the
shadows under the dark arch ﬂed. The monstrous Watchers sat there
cold and still, revealed in all their hideous shape. For a moment Sam
caught a glitter in the black stones of their eyes, the very malice of
which made him quail; but slowly he felt their will waver and crumble
into fear.
He sprang past them; but even as he did so, thrusting the phial
back into his bosom, he was aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had
snapped to behind him, that their vigilance was renewed. And from
those evil heads there came a high shrill cry that echoed in the tower-

THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL

903

ing walls before him. Far up above, like an answering signal, a harsh
bell clanged a single stroke.
‘That’s done it!’ said Sam. ‘Now I’ve rung the front-door bell!
Well, come on somebody!’ he cried. ‘Tell Captain Shagrat that the
great Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too!’
There was no answer. Sam strode forward. Sting glittered blue in
his hand. The courtyard lay in deep shadow, but he could see that
the pavement was strewn with bodies. Right at his feet were two
orc-archers with knives sticking in their backs. Beyond lay many more
shapes; some singly as they had been hewn down or shot; others in
pairs, still grappling one another, dead in the very throes of stabbing,
throttling, biting. The stones were slippery with dark blood.
Two liveries Sam noticed, one marked by the Red Eye, the other
by a Moon disﬁgured with a ghastly face of death; but he did not
stop to look more closely. Across the court a great door at the foot
of the Tower stood half open, and a red light came through; a large
orc lay dead upon the threshold. Sam sprang over the body and went
in; and then he peered about at a loss.
A wide and echoing passage led back from the door towards the
mountain-side. It was dimly lit with torches ﬂaring in brackets on
the walls, but its distant end was lost in gloom. Many doors and
openings could be seen on this side and that; but it was empty save
for two or three more bodies sprawling on the ﬂoor. From what he
had heard of the captains’ talk Sam knew that, dead or alive, Frodo
would most likely be found in a chamber high up in the turret far
above; but he might search for a day before he found the way.
‘It’ll be near the back, I guess,’ Sam muttered. ‘The whole Tower
climbs backwards-like. And anyway I’d better follow these lights.’
He advanced down the passage, but slowly now, each step more
reluctant. Terror was beginning to grip him again. There was no
sound save the rap of his feet, which seemed to grow to an echoing
noise, like the slapping of great hands upon the stones. The dead
bodies; the emptiness; the dank black walls that in the torchlight
seemed to drip with blood; the fear of sudden death lurking in doorway or shadow; and behind all his mind the waiting watchful malice
at the gate: it was almost more than he could screw himself to face.
He would have welcomed a ﬁght – with not too many enemies at a
time – rather than this hideous brooding uncertainty. He forced himself to think of Frodo, lying bound or in pain or dead somewhere in
this dreadful place. He went on.
He had passed beyond the torchlight, almost to a great arched
door at the end of the passage, the inner side of the under-gate, as
he rightly guessed, when there came from high above a dreadful

904

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

choking shriek. He stopped short. Then he heard feet coming. Someone was running in great haste down an echoing stairway overhead.
His will was too weak and slow to restrain his hand. It dragged at
the chain and clutched the Ring. But Sam did not put it on; for even
as he clasped it to his breast, an orc came clattering down. Leaping
out of a dark opening at the right, it ran towards him. It was no more
than six paces from him when, lifting its head, it saw him; and Sam
could hear its gasping breath and see the glare in its bloodshot eyes.
It stopped short aghast. For what it saw was not a small frightened
hobbit trying to hold a steady sword: it saw a great silent shape,
cloaked in a grey shadow, looming against the wavering light behind;
in one hand it held a sword, the very light of which was a bitter pain,
the other was clutched at its breast, but held concealed some nameless
menace of power and doom.
For a moment the orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp of
fear it turned and ﬂed back as it had come. Never was any dog more
heartened when its enemy turned tail than Sam at this unexpected
ﬂight. With a shout he gave chase.
‘Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose!’ he cried. ‘I’m coming. Just you
show me the way up, or I’ll skin you!’
But the orc was in its own haunts, nimble and well-fed. Sam was
a stranger, hungry and weary. The stairs were high and steep and
winding. Sam’s breath began to come in gasps. The orc had soon
passed out of sight, and now only faintly could be heard the slapping
of its feet as it went on and up. Every now and again it gave a yell,
and the echo ran along the walls. But slowly all sound of it died
away.
Sam plodded on. He felt that he was on the right road, and his
spirits had risen a good deal. He thrust the Ring away and tightened
his belt. ‘Well, well!’ he said. ‘If only they all take such a dislike to
me and my Sting, this may turn out better than I hoped. And anyway
it looks as if Shagrat, Gorbag, and company have done nearly all my
job for me. Except for that little frightened rat, I do believe there’s
nobody left alive in the place!’
And with that he stopped, brought up hard, as if he had hit his
head against the stone wall. The full meaning of what he had said
struck him like a blow. Nobody left alive! Whose had been that
horrible dying shriek? ‘Frodo, Frodo! Master!’ he cried half sobbing.
‘If they’ve killed you, what shall I do? Well, I’m coming at last, right
to the top, to see what I must.’
Up, up he went. It was dark save for an occasional torch ﬂaring
at a turn, or beside some opening that led into the higher levels of

THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL

905

the Tower. Sam tried to count the steps, but after two hundred he
lost his reckoning. He was moving quietly now; for he thought that
he could hear the sound of voices talking, still some way above. More
than one rat remained alive it seemed.
All at once, when he felt that he could pump out no more breath,
nor force his knees to bend again, the stair ended. He stood still.
The voices were now loud and near. Sam peered about. He had
climbed right to the ﬂat roof of the third and highest tier of the
Tower: an open space, about twenty yards across, with a low parapet.
There the stair was covered by a small domed chamber in the midst
of the roof, with low doors facing east and west. Eastward Sam
could see the plain of Mordor vast and dark below, and the burning
mountain far away. A fresh turmoil was surging in its deep wells,
and the rivers of ﬁre blazed so ﬁercely that even at this distance of
many miles the light of them lit the tower-top with a red glare.
Westward the view was blocked by the base of the great turret that
stood at the back of this upper court and reared its horn high above
the crest of the encircling hills. Light gleamed in a window-slit. Its
door was not ten yards from where Sam stood. It was open but dark,
and from just within its shadow the voices came.
At ﬁrst Sam did not listen; he took a pace out of the eastward
door and looked about. At once he saw that up here the ﬁghting had
been ﬁercest. All the court was choked with dead orcs, or their severed
and scattered heads and limbs. The place stank of death. A snarl
followed by a blow and a cry sent him darting back into hiding. An
orc-voice rose in anger, and he knew it again at once, harsh, brutal,
cold. It was Shagrat speaking, Captain of the Tower.
‘You won’t go again, you say? Curse you, Snaga, you little maggot!
If you think I’m so damaged that it’s safe to ﬂout me, you’re mistaken.
Come here, and I’ll squeeze your eyes out, like I did to Radbug just
now. And when some new lads come, I’ll deal with you: I’ll send
you to Shelob.’
‘They won’t come, not before you’re dead anyway,’ answered
Snaga surlily. ‘I’ve told you twice that Gorbag’s swine got to the gate
ﬁrst, and none of ours got out. Lagduf and Muzgash ran through,
but they were shot. I saw it from a window, I tell you. And they were
the last.’
‘Then you must go. I must stay here anyway. But I’m hurt. The
Black Pits take that ﬁlthy rebel Gorbag!’ Shagrat’s voice trailed off
into a string of foul names and curses. ‘I gave him better than I got,
but he knifed me, the dung, before I throttled him. You must go,
or I’ll eat you. News must get through to Lugbúrz, or we’ll both
be for the Black Pits. Yes, you too. You won’t escape by skulking
here.’

906

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘I’m not going down those stairs again,’ growled Snaga, ‘be you
captain or no. Nar! Keep your hands off your knife, or I’ll put an
arrow in your guts. You won’t be a captain long when They hear
about all these goings-on. I’ve fought for the Tower against those
stinking Morgul-rats, but a nice mess you two precious captains have
made of things, ﬁghting over the swag.’
‘That’s enough from you,’ snarled Shagrat. ‘I had my orders. It
was Gorbag started it, trying to pinch that pretty shirt.’
‘Well, you put his back up, being so high and mighty. And he had
more sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the
most dangerous of these spies was still loose, and you wouldn’t listen.
And you won’t listen now. Gorbag was right, I tell you. There’s a
great ﬁghter about, one of those bloody-handed Elves, or one of the
ﬁlthy tarks.* He’s coming here, I tell you. You heard the bell. He’s
got past the Watchers, and that’s tark’s work. He’s on the stairs. And
until he’s off them, I’m not going down. Not if you were a Nazgûl,
I wouldn’t.’
‘So that’s it, is it?’ yelled Shagrat. ‘You’ll do this, and you’ll not
do that? And when he does come, you’ll bolt and leave me? No, you
won’t! I’ll put red maggot-holes in your belly ﬁrst.’
Out of the turret-door the smaller orc came ﬂying. Behind him
came Shagrat, a large orc with long arms that, as he ran crouching,
reached to the ground. But one arm hung limp and seemed to be
bleeding; the other hugged a large black bundle. In the red glare
Sam, cowering behind the stair-door, caught a glimpse of his evil
face as it passed: it was scored as if by rending claws and smeared
with blood; slaver dripped from its protruding fangs; the mouth
snarled like an animal.
As far as Sam could see, Shagrat hunted Snaga round the roof,
until ducking and eluding him the smaller orc with a yelp darted
back into the turret and disappeared. Then Shagrat halted. Out of
the eastward door Sam could see him now by the parapet, panting,
his left claw clenching and unclenching feebly. He put the bundle
on the ﬂoor and with his right claw drew out a long red knife and
spat on it. Going to the parapet he leaned over, looking down into
the outer court far below. Twice he shouted but no answer came.
Suddenly, as Shagrat was stooped over the battlement, his back
to the roof-top, Sam to his amazement saw that one of the sprawling
bodies was moving. It was crawling. It put out a claw and clutched
the bundle. It staggered up. In its other hand it held a broad-headed
spear with a short broken haft. It was poised for a stabbing thrust.
But at that very moment a hiss escaped its teeth, a gasp of pain or
* See Appendix F, 1131.

THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL

907

hate. Quick as a snake Shagrat slipped aside, twisted round, and
drove his knife into his enemy’s throat.
‘Got you, Gorbag!’ he cried. ‘Not quite dead, eh? Well, I’ll ﬁnish
my job now.’ He sprang on to the fallen body, and stamped and
trampled it in his fury, stooping now and again to stab and slash it
with his knife. Satisﬁed at last, he threw back his head and let out a
horrible gurgling yell of triumph. Then he licked his knife, and put
it between his teeth, and catching up the bundle he came loping
towards the near door of the stairs.
Sam had no time to think. He might have slipped out of the other
door, but hardly without being seen; and he could not have played
hide-and-seek with this hideous orc for long. He did what was probably the best thing he could have done. He sprang out to meet Shagrat
with a shout. He was no longer holding the Ring, but it was there,
a hidden power, a cowing menace to the slaves of Mordor; and in
his hand was Sting, and its light smote the eyes of the orc like the
glitter of cruel stars in the terrible elf-countries, the dream of which
was a cold fear to all his kind. And Shagrat could not both ﬁght and
keep hold of his treasure. He stopped, growling, baring his fangs.
Then once more, orc-fashion, he leapt aside, and as Sam sprang at
him, using the heavy bundle as both shield and weapon, he thrust it
hard into his enemy’s face. Sam staggered, and before he could
recover, Shagrat darted past and down the stairs.
Sam ran after him, cursing, but he did not go far. Soon the thought
of Frodo returned to him, and he remembered that the other orc had
gone back into the turret. Here was another dreadful choice, and he
had no time to ponder it. If Shagrat got away, he would soon get
help and come back. But if Sam pursued him, the other orc might
do some horrible deed up there. And anyway Sam might miss Shagrat
or be killed by him. He turned quickly and ran back up the stairs.
‘Wrong again, I expect,’ he sighed. ‘But it’s my job to go right up to
the top ﬁrst, whatever happens afterwards.’
Away below Shagrat went leaping down the stairs and out over
the court and through the gate, bearing his precious burden. If Sam
could have seen him and known the grief that his escape would bring,
he might have quailed. But now his mind was set on the last stage
of his search. He came cautiously to the turret-door and stepped
inside. It opened into darkness. But soon his staring eyes were aware
of a dim light at his right hand. It came from an opening that led to
another stairway, dark and narrow: it appeared to go winding up the
turret along the inside of its round outer wall. A torch was glimmering
from somewhere up above.
Softly Sam began to climb. He came to the guttering torch, ﬁxed
above a door on his left that faced a window-slit looking out westward:

908

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

one of the red eyes that he and Frodo had seen from down below
by the tunnel’s mouth. Quickly Sam passed the door and hurried on
to the second storey, dreading at any moment to be attacked and to
feel throttling ﬁngers seize his throat from behind. He came next to
a window looking east and another torch above the door to a passage
through the middle of the turret. The door was open, the passage dark
save for the glimmer of the torch and the red glare from outside
ﬁltering through the window-slit. But here the stair stopped and
climbed no further. Sam crept into the passage. On either side there
was a low door; both were closed and locked. There was no sound
at all.
‘A dead end,’ muttered Sam; ‘and after all my climb! This can’t
be the top of the tower. But what can I do now?’
He ran back to the lower storey and tried the door. It would not
move. He ran up again, and sweat began to trickle down his face.
He felt that even minutes were precious, but one by one they escaped;
and he could do nothing. He cared no longer for Shagrat or Snaga
or any other orc that was ever spawned. He longed only for his
master, for one sight of his face or one touch of his hand.
At last, weary and feeling ﬁnally defeated, he sat on a step below
the level of the passage-ﬂoor and bowed his head into his hands. It
was quiet, horribly quiet. The torch, that was already burning low
when he arrived, sputtered and went out; and he felt the darkness
cover him like a tide. And then softly, to his own surprise, there at
the vain end of his long journey and his grief, moved by what thought
in his heart he could not tell, Sam began to sing.
His voice sounded thin and quavering in the cold dark tower:
the voice of a forlorn and weary hobbit that no listening orc could
possibly mistake for the clear song of an Elven-lord. He murmured
old childish tunes out of the Shire, and snatches of Mr. Bilbo’s rhymes
that came into his mind like ﬂeeting glimpses of the country of his
home. And then suddenly new strength rose in him, and his voice
rang out, while words of his own came unbidden to ﬁt the simple
tune.
In western lands beneath the Sun
the ﬂowers may rise in Spring,
the trees may bud, the waters run,
the merry ﬁnches sing.
Or there maybe ’tis cloudless night
and swaying beeches bear
the Elven-stars as jewels white
amid their branching hair.

THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL

909

Though here at journey’s end I lie
in darkness buried deep,
beyond all towers strong and high,
beyond all mountains steep,
above all shadows rides the Sun
and Stars for ever dwell:
I will not say the Day is done,
nor bid the Stars farewell.
‘Beyond all towers strong and high,’ he began again, and then he
stopped short. He thought that he had heard a faint voice answering
him. But now he could hear nothing. Yes, he could hear something,
but not a voice. Footsteps were approaching. Now a door was being
opened quietly in the passage above; the hinges creaked. Sam
crouched down listening. The door closed with a dull thud; and then
a snarling orc-voice rang out.
‘Ho la! You up there, you dunghill rat! Stop your squeaking, or
I’ll come and deal with you. D’you hear?’
There was no answer.
‘All right,’ growled Snaga. ‘But I’ll come and have a look at you
all the same, and see what you’re up to.’
The hinges creaked again, and Sam, now peering over the corner
of the passage-threshold, saw a ﬂicker of light in an open doorway,
and the dim shape of an orc coming out. He seemed to be carrying
a ladder. Suddenly the answer dawned on Sam: the topmost chamber
was reached by a trap-door in the roof of the passage. Snaga thrust
the ladder upwards, steadied it, and then clambered out of sight.
Sam heard a bolt drawn back. Then he heard the hideous voice
speaking again.
‘You lie quiet, or you’ll pay for it! You’ve not got long to live in
peace, I guess; but if you don’t want the fun to begin right now, keep
your trap shut, see? There’s a reminder for you!’ There was a sound
like the crack of a whip.
At that rage blazed in Sam’s heart to a sudden fury. He sprang up,
ran, and went up the ladder like a cat. His head came out in the middle
of the ﬂoor of a large round chamber. A red lamp hung from its roof;
the westward window-slit was high and dark. Something was lying on
the ﬂoor by the wall under the window, but over it a black orc-shape
was straddled. It raised a whip a second time, but the blow never fell.
With a cry Sam leapt across the ﬂoor, Sting in hand. The orc
wheeled round, but before it could make a move Sam slashed its
whip-hand from its arm. Howling with pain and fear but desperate
the orc charged head-down at him. Sam’s next blow went wide, and
thrown off his balance he fell backwards, clutching at the orc as it

910

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

stumbled over him. Before he could scramble up he heard a cry and
a thud. The orc in its wild haste had tripped on the ladder-head and
fallen through the open trap-door. Sam gave no more thought to it.
He ran to the ﬁgure huddled on the ﬂoor. It was Frodo.
He was naked, lying as if in a swoon on a heap of ﬁlthy rags: his
arm was ﬂung up, shielding his head, and across his side there ran
an ugly whip-weal.
‘Frodo! Mr. Frodo, my dear!’ cried Sam, tears almost blinding
him. ‘It’s Sam, I’ve come!’ He half lifted his master and hugged him
to his breast. Frodo opened his eyes.
‘Am I still dreaming?’ he muttered. ‘But the other dreams were
horrible.’
‘You’re not dreaming at all, Master,’ said Sam. ‘It’s real. It’s me.
I’ve come.’
‘I can hardly believe it,’ said Frodo, clutching him. ‘There was an
orc with a whip, and then it turns into Sam! Then I wasn’t dreaming
after all when I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer?
Was it you?’
‘It was indeed, Mr. Frodo. I’d given up hope, almost. I couldn’t
ﬁnd you.’
‘Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam,’ said Frodo, and he lay back
in Sam’s gentle arms, closing his eyes, like a child at rest when
night-fears are driven away by some loved voice or hand.
Sam felt that he could sit like that in endless happiness; but it was
not allowed. It was not enough for him to ﬁnd his master, he had
still to try and save him. He kissed Frodo’s forehead. ‘Come! Wake
up, Mr. Frodo!’ he said, trying to sound as cheerful as he had when
he drew back the curtains at Bag End on a summer’s morning.
Frodo sighed and sat up. ‘Where are we? How did I get here?’ he
asked.
‘There’s no time for tales till we get somewhere else, Mr. Frodo,’
said Sam. ‘But you’re in the top of that tower you and me saw from
away down by the tunnel before the orcs got you. How long ago that
was I don’t know. More than a day, I guess.’
‘Only that?’ said Frodo. ‘It seems weeks. You must tell me all
about it, if we get a chance. Something hit me, didn’t it? And I fell
into darkness and foul dreams, and woke and found that waking was
worse. Orcs were all round me. I think they had just been pouring
some horrible burning drink down my throat. My head grew clear,
but I was aching and weary. They stripped me of everything; and
then two great brutes came and questioned me, questioned me until
I thought I should go mad, standing over me, gloating, ﬁngering their
knives. I’ll never forget their claws and eyes.’

THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL

911

‘You won’t, if you talk about them, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘And
if we don’t want to see them again, the sooner we get going the
better. Can you walk?’
‘Yes, I can walk,’ said Frodo, getting up slowly. ‘I am not hurt,
Sam. Only I feel very tired, and I’ve a pain here.’ He put his hand
to the back of his neck above his left shoulder. He stood up, and it
looked to Sam as if he was clothed in ﬂame: his naked skin was
scarlet in the light of the lamp above. Twice he paced across the
ﬂoor.
‘That’s better!’ he said, his spirits rising a little. ‘I didn’t dare to
move when I was left alone, or one of the guards came. Until the
yelling and ﬁghting began. The two big brutes: they quarrelled, I
think. Over me and my things. I lay here terriﬁed. And then all went
deadly quiet, and that was worse.’
‘Yes, they quarrelled, seemingly,’ said Sam. ‘There must have been
a couple of hundred of the dirty creatures in this place. A bit of a
tall order for Sam Gamgee, as you might say. But they’ve done all
the killing of themselves. That’s lucky, but it’s too long to make a
song about, till we’re out of here. Now what’s to be done? You can’t
go walking in the Black Land in naught but your skin, Mr. Frodo.’
‘They’ve taken everything, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘Everything I had.
Do you understand? Everything!’ He cowered on the ﬂoor again with
bowed head, as his own words brought home to him the fullness of
the disaster, and despair overwhelmed him. ‘The quest has failed,
Sam. Even if we get out of here, we can’t escape. Only Elves can
escape. Away, away out of Middle-earth, far away over the Sea. If
even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.’
‘No, not everything, Mr. Frodo. And it hasn’t failed, not yet. I
took it, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon. And I’ve kept it safe. It’s
round my neck now, and a terrible burden it is, too.’ Sam fumbled
for the Ring and its chain. ‘But I suppose you must take it back.’
Now it had come to it, Sam felt reluctant to give up the Ring and
burden his master with it again.
‘You’ve got it?’ gasped Frodo. ‘You’ve got it here? Sam, you’re a
marvel!’ Then quickly and strangely his tone changed. ‘Give it to
me!’ he cried, standing up, holding out a trembling hand. ‘Give it
me at once! You can’t have it!’
‘All right, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam, rather startled. ‘Here it is!’ Slowly
he drew the Ring out and passed the chain over his head. ‘But you’re
in the land of Mordor now, sir; and when you get out, you’ll see the
Fiery Mountain and all. You’ll ﬁnd the Ring very dangerous now,
and very hard to bear. If it’s too hard a job, I could share it with
you, maybe?’
‘No, no!’ cried Frodo, snatching the Ring and chain from Sam’s

912

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

hands. ‘No you won’t, you thief !’ He panted, staring at Sam with
eyes wide with fear and enmity. Then suddenly, clasping the Ring
in one clenched ﬁst, he stood aghast. A mist seemed to clear from
his eyes, and he passed a hand over his aching brow. The hideous
vision had seemed so real to him, half bemused as he was still with
wound and fear. Sam had changed before his very eyes into an orc
again, leering and pawing at his treasure, a foul little creature with
greedy eyes and slobbering mouth. But now the vision had passed.
There was Sam kneeling before him, his face wrung with pain, as if
he had been stabbed in the heart; tears welled from his eyes.
‘O Sam!’ cried Frodo. ‘What have I said? What have I done?
Forgive me! After all you have done. It is the horrible power of the
Ring. I wish it had never, never, been found. But don’t mind me,
Sam. I must carry the burden to the end. It can’t be altered. You
can’t come between me and this doom.’
‘That’s all right, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam, rubbing his sleeve across
his eyes. ‘I understand. But I can still help, can’t I? I’ve got to get
you out of here. At once, see! But ﬁrst you want some clothes and
gear, and then some food. The clothes will be the easiest part. As
we’re in Mordor, we’d best dress up Mordor-fashion; and anyway
there isn’t no choice. It’ll have to be orc-stuff for you, Mr. Frodo,
I’m afraid. And for me too. If we go together, we’d best match. Now
put this round you!’
Sam unclasped his grey cloak and cast it about Frodo’s shoulders.
Then unslinging his pack he laid it on the ﬂoor. He drew Sting from
its sheath. Hardly a ﬂicker was to be seen upon its blade. ‘I was
forgetting this, Mr. Frodo,’ he said. ‘No, they didn’t get everything!
You lent me Sting, if you remember, and the Lady’s glass. I’ve got
them both still. But lend them to me a little longer, Mr. Frodo. I
must go and see what I can ﬁnd. You stay here. Walk about a bit
and ease your legs. I shan’t be long. I shan’t have to go far.’
‘Take care, Sam!’ said Frodo. ‘And be quick! There may be orcs
still alive, lurking in wait.’
‘I’ve got to chance it,’ said Sam. He stepped to the trap-door and
slipped down the ladder. In a minute his head reappeared. He threw
a long knife on the ﬂoor.
‘There’s something that might be useful,’ he said. ‘He’s dead: the
one that whipped you. Broke his neck, it seems, in his hurry. Now
you draw up the ladder, if you can, Mr. Frodo; and don’t you let it
down till you hear me call the pass-word. Elbereth I’ll call. What the
Elves say. No orc would say that.’
Frodo sat for a while and shivered, dreadful fears chasing one
another through his mind. Then he got up, drew the grey elven-cloak

THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL

913

about him, and to keep his mind occupied, began to walk to and fro,
prying and peering into every corner of his prison.
It was not very long, though fear made it seem an hour at least,
before he heard Sam’s voice calling softly from below: Elbereth,
Elbereth. Frodo let down the light ladder. Up came Sam, pufﬁng,
heaving a great bundle on his head. He let it fall with a thud.
‘Quick now, Mr. Frodo!’ he said. ‘I’ve had a bit of a search to
ﬁnd anything small enough for the likes of us. We’ll have to make
do. But we must hurry. I’ve met nothing alive, and I’ve seen nothing,
but I’m not easy. I think this place is being watched. I can’t explain
it, but well: it feels to me as if one of those foul ﬂying Riders was
about, up in the blackness where he can’t be seen.’
He opened the bundle. Frodo looked in disgust at the contents,
but there was nothing for it: he had to put the things on, or go naked.
There were long hairy breeches of some unclean beast-fell, and a
tunic of dirty leather. He drew them on. Over the tunic went a coat
of stout ring-mail, short for a full-sized orc, too long for Frodo and
heavy. About it he clasped a belt, at which there hung a short sheath
holding a broad-bladed stabbing-sword. Sam had brought several
orc-helmets. One of them ﬁtted Frodo well enough, a black cap with
iron rim, and iron hoops covered with leather upon which the Evil
Eye was painted in red above the beaklike nose-guard.
‘The Morgul-stuff, Gorbag’s gear, was a better ﬁt and better
made,’ said Sam; ‘but it wouldn’t do, I guess, to go carrying his
tokens into Mordor, not after this business here. Well, there you are,
Mr. Frodo. A perfect little orc, if I may make so bold – at least you
would be, if we could cover your face with a mask, give you longer
arms, and make you bow-legged. This will hide some of the tell-tales.’
He put a large black cloak round Frodo’s shoulders. ‘Now you’re
ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.’
‘What about you, Sam?’ said Frodo. ‘Aren’t we going to match?’
‘Well, Mr. Frodo, I’ve been thinking,’ said Sam. ‘I’d best not leave
any of my stuff behind, and we can’t destroy it. And I can’t wear
orc-mail over all my clothes, can I? I’ll just have to cover up.’
He knelt down and carefully folded his elven-cloak. It went into
a surprisingly small roll. This he put into his pack that lay on the
ﬂoor. Standing up, he slung it behind his back, put an orc-helm on
his head, and cast another black cloak about his shoulders. ‘There!’
he said. ‘Now we match, near enough. And now we must be off !’
‘I can’t go all the way at a run, Sam,’ said Frodo with a wry smile.
‘I hope you’ve made inquiries about inns along the road? Or have
you forgotten about food and drink?’
‘Save me, but so I had!’ said Sam. He whistled in dismay. ‘Bless
me, Mr. Frodo, but you’ve gone and made me that hungry and

914

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

thirsty! I don’t know when drop or morsel last passed my lips. I’d
forgotten it, trying to ﬁnd you. But let me think! Last time I looked
I’d got about enough of that waybread, and of what Captain Faramir
gave us, to keep me on my legs for a couple of weeks at a pinch. But
if there’s a drop left in my bottle, there’s no more. That’s not going
to be enough for two, nohow. Don’t orcs eat, and don’t they drink?
Or do they just live on foul air and poison?’
‘No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that bred them can
only mock, it cannot make: not real new things of its own. I don’t
think it gave life to the orcs, it only ruined them and twisted them;
and if they are to live at all, they have to live like other living creatures.
Foul waters and foul meats they’ll take, if they can get no better, but
not poison. They’ve fed me, and so I’m better off than you. There
must be food and water somewhere in this place.’
‘But there’s no time to look for them,’ said Sam.
‘Well, things are a bit better than you think,’ said Frodo. ‘I have
had a bit of luck while you were away. Indeed they did not take
everything. I’ve found my food-bag among some rags on the ﬂoor.
They’ve rummaged it, of course. But I guess they disliked the very
look and smell of the lembas, worse than Gollum did. It’s scattered
about and some of it is trampled and broken, but I’ve gathered it
together. It’s not far short of what you’ve got. But they’ve taken
Faramir’s food, and they’ve slashed up my water-bottle.’
‘Well, there’s no more to be said,’ said Sam. ‘We’ve got enough
to start on. But the water’s going to be a bad business. But come,
Mr. Frodo! Off we go, or a whole lake of it won’t do us any good!’
‘Not till you’ve had a mouthful, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘I won’t budge.
Here, take this elven-cake, and drink that last drop in your bottle!
The whole thing is quite hopeless, so it’s no good worrying about
tomorrow. It probably won’t come.’
At last they started. Down the ladder they climbed, and then Sam
took it and laid it in the passage beside the huddled body of the fallen
orc. The stair was dark, but on the roof-top the glare of the Mountain
could still be seen, though it was dying down now to a sullen red.
They picked up two shields to complete their disguise and then
went on.
Down the great stairway they plodded. The high chamber of the
turret behind, where they had met again, seemed almost homely:
they were out in the open again now, and terror ran along the walls.
All might be dead in the Tower of Cirith Ungol, but it was steeped
in fear and evil still.
At length they came to the door upon the outer court, and they
halted. Even from where they stood they felt the malice of the

THE TOWER OF CIRITH UNGOL

915

Watchers beating on them, black silent shapes on either side of the
gate through which the glare of Mordor dimly showed. As they
threaded their way among the hideous bodies of the orcs each step
became more difﬁcult. Before they even reached the archway they
were brought to a stand. To move an inch further was a pain and
weariness to will and limb.
Frodo had no strength for such a battle. He sank to the ground.
‘I can’t go on, Sam,’ he murmured. ‘I’m going to faint. I don’t know
what’s come over me.’
‘I do, Mr. Frodo. Hold up now! It’s the gate. There’s some devilry
there. But I got through, and I’m going to get out. It can’t be more
dangerous than before. Now for it!’
Sam drew out the elven-glass of Galadriel again. As if to do honour
to his hardihood, and to grace with splendour his faithful brown
hobbit-hand that had done such deeds, the phial blazed forth suddenly, so that all the shadowy court was lit with a dazzling radiance
like lightning; but it remained steady and did not pass.
‘Gilthoniel, A Elbereth!’ Sam cried. For, why he did not know, his
thought sprang back suddenly to the Elves in the Shire, and the song
that drove away the Black Rider in the trees.
‘Aiya elenion ancalima!’ cried Frodo once again behind him.
The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the
snapping of a cord, and Frodo and Sam stumbled forward. Then
they ran. Through the gate and past the great seated ﬁgures with
their glittering eyes. There was a crack. The keystone of the arch
crashed almost on their heels, and the wall above crumbled, and fell
in ruin. Only by a hair did they escape. A bell clanged; and from the
Watchers there went up a high and dreadful wail. Far up above in
the darkness it was answered. Out of the black sky there came dropping like a bolt a winged shape, rending the clouds with a ghastly
shriek.

Chapter 2
THE LAND OF SHADOW
Sam had just wits enough left to thrust the phial back into his breast.
‘Run, Mr. Frodo!’ he cried. ‘No, not that way! There’s a sheer drop
over the wall. Follow me!’
Down the road from the gate they ﬂed. In ﬁfty paces, with a swift
bend round a jutting bastion of the cliff, it took them out of sight
from the Tower. They had escaped for the moment. Cowering back
against the rock they drew breath, and then they clutched at their
hearts. Perching now on the wall beside the ruined gate the Nazgûl
sent out its deadly cries. All the cliffs echoed.
In terror they stumbled on. Soon the road bent sharply eastward
again and exposed them for a dreadful moment to view from the
Tower. As they ﬂitted across they glanced back and saw the great
black shape upon the battlement; then they plunged down between
high rock-walls in a cutting that fell steeply to join the Morgul-road.
They came to the way-meeting. There was still no sign of orcs, nor
of an answer to the cry of the Nazgûl; but they knew that the silence
would not last long. At any moment now the hunt would begin.
‘This won’t do, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘If we were real orcs, we ought
to be dashing back to the Tower, not running away. The ﬁrst enemy
we meet will know us. We must get off this road somehow.’
‘But we can’t,’ said Sam, ‘not without wings.’
The eastern faces of the Ephel Dúath were sheer, falling in cliff
and precipice to the black trough that lay between them and the inner
ridge. A short way beyond the way-meeting, after another steep incline,
a ﬂying bridge of stone leapt over the chasm and bore the road across
into the tumbled slopes and glens of the Morgai. With a desperate
spurt Frodo and Sam dashed along the bridge; but they had hardly
reached its further end when they heard the hue and cry begin. Away
behind them, now high above on the mountain-side, loomed the Tower
of Cirith Ungol, its stones glowing dully. Suddenly its harsh bell
clanged again, and then broke into a shattering peal. Horns sounded.
And now from beyond the bridge-end came answering cries. Down
in the dark trough, cut off from the dying glare of Orodruin, Frodo
and Sam could not see ahead, but already they heard the tramp of ironshod feet, and upon the road there rang the swift clatter of hoofs.
‘Quick, Sam! Over we go!’ cried Frodo. They scrambled on to the
low parapet of the bridge. Fortunately there was no longer any dread-

THE LAND OF SHADOW

917

ful drop into the gulf, for the slopes of the Morgai had already risen
almost to the level of the road; but it was too dark for them to guess
the depth of the fall.
‘Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘Good-bye!’
He let go. Frodo followed. And even as they fell they heard the
rush of horsemen sweeping over the bridge and the rattle of orc-feet
running up behind. But Sam would have laughed, if he had dared.
Half fearing a breaking plunge down on to unseen rocks the hobbits
landed, in a drop of no more than a dozen feet, with a thud and a
crunch into the last thing that they had expected: a tangle of thorny
bushes. There Sam lay still, softly sucking a scratched hand.
When the sound of hoof and foot had passed he ventured a whisper. ‘Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but I didn’t know as anything grew in
Mordor! But if I had a’known, this is just what I’d have looked for.
These thorns must be a foot long by the feel of them; they’ve stuck
through everything I’ve got on. Wish I’d a’put that mailshirt on!’
‘Orc-mail doesn’t keep these thorns out,’ said Frodo. ‘Not even
a leather jerkin is any good.’
They had a struggle to get out of the thicket. The thorns and
briars were as tough as wire and as clinging as claws. Their cloaks
were rent and tattered before they broke free at last.
‘Now down we go, Sam,’ Frodo whispered. ‘Down into the valley
quick, and then turn northward, as soon as ever we can.’
Day was coming again in the world outside, and far beyond the
glooms of Mordor the Sun was climbing over the eastern rim of
Middle-earth; but here all was still dark as night. The Mountain
smouldered and its ﬁres went out. The glare faded from the cliffs.
The easterly wind that had been blowing ever since they left Ithilien
now seemed dead. Slowly and painfully they clambered down, groping, stumbling, scrambling among rock and briar and dead wood in
the blind shadows, down and down until they could go no further.
At length they stopped, and sat side by side, their backs against a
boulder. Both were sweating. ‘If Shagrat himself was to offer me a
glass of water, I’d shake his hand,’ said Sam.
‘Don’t say such things!’ said Frodo. ‘It only makes it worse.’ Then
he stretched himself out, dizzy and weary, and he spoke no more for
a while. At last with a struggle he got up again. To his amazement
he found that Sam was asleep. ‘Wake up, Sam!’ he said. ‘Come on!
It’s time we made another effort.’
Sam scrambled to his feet. ‘Well I never!’ he said. ‘I must have
dropped off. It’s a long time, Mr. Frodo, since I had a proper sleep,
and my eyes just closed down on their own.’
*
*
*

918

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Frodo now led the way, northward as near as he could guess,
among the stones and boulders lying thick at the bottom of the great
ravine. But presently he stopped again.
‘It’s no good, Sam,’ he said. ‘I can’t manage it. This mail-shirt, I
mean. Not in my present state. Even my mithril-coat seemed heavy
when I was tired. This is far heavier. And what’s the use of it? We
shan’t win through by ﬁghting.’
‘But we may have some to do,’ said Sam. ‘And there’s knives and
stray arrows. That Gollum isn’t dead, for one thing. I don’t like to
think of you with naught but a bit of leather between you and a stab
in the dark.’
‘Look here, Sam dear lad,’ said Frodo: ‘I am tired, weary, I haven’t
a hope left. But I have to go on trying to get to the Mountain, as
long as I can move. The Ring is enough. This extra weight is killing
me. It must go. But don’t think I’m ungrateful. I hate to think of the
foul work you must have had among the bodies to ﬁnd it for me.’
‘Don’t talk about it, Mr. Frodo. Bless you! I’d carry you on my
back, if I could. Let it go then!’
Frodo laid aside his cloak and took off the orc-mail and ﬂung it
away. He shivered a little. ‘What I really need is something warm,’
he said. ‘It’s gone cold, or else I’ve caught a chill.’
‘You can have my cloak, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. He unslung his
pack and took out the elven-cloak. ‘How’s this, Mr. Frodo?’ he said.
‘You wrap that orc-rag close round you, and put the belt outside it.
Then this can go over all. It don’t look quite orc-fashion, but it’ll
keep you warmer; and I daresay it’ll keep you from harm better than
any other gear. It was made by the Lady.’
Frodo took the cloak and fastened the brooch. ‘That’s better!’ he
said. ‘I feel much lighter. I can go on now. But this blind dark seems
to be getting into my heart. As I lay in prison, Sam, I tried to remember the Brandywine, and Woody End, and The Water running
through the mill at Hobbiton. But I can’t see them now.’
‘There now, Mr. Frodo, it’s you that’s talking of water this time!’
said Sam. ‘If only the Lady could see us or hear us, I’d say to her:
‘‘Your Ladyship, all we want is light and water: just clean water and
plain daylight, better than any jewels, begging your pardon.’’ But it’s
a long way to Lórien.’ Sam sighed and waved his hand towards the
heights of the Ephel Dúath, now only to be guessed as a deeper
blackness against the black sky.
They started off again. They had not gone far when Frodo paused.
‘There’s a Black Rider over us,’ he said. ‘I can feel it. We had better
keep still for a while.’
Crouched under a great boulder they sat facing back westward

THE LAND OF SHADOW

919

and did not speak for some time. Then Frodo breathed a sigh of
relief. ‘It’s passed,’ he said. They stood up, and then they both stared
in wonder. Away to their left, southward, against a sky that was
turning grey, the peaks and high ridges of the great range began to
appear dark and black, visible shapes. Light was growing behind
them. Slowly it crept towards the North. There was battle far above
in the high spaces of the air. The billowing clouds of Mordor were
being driven back, their edges tattering as a wind out of the living
world came up and swept the fumes and smokes towards the dark
land of their home. Under the lifting skirts of the dreary canopy
dim light leaked into Mordor like pale morning through the grimed
window of a prison.
‘Look at it, Mr. Frodo!’ said Sam. ‘Look at it! The wind’s changed.
Something’s happening. He’s not having it all his own way. His
darkness is breaking up out in the world there. I wish I could see
what is going on!’
It was the morning of the ﬁfteenth of March, and over the Vale
of Anduin the Sun was rising above the eastern shadow, and the
south-west wind was blowing. Théoden lay dying on the Pelennor
Fields.
As Frodo and Sam stood and gazed, the rim of light spread all
along the line of the Ephel Dúath, and then they saw a shape, moving
at a great speed out of the West, at ﬁrst only a black speck against
the glimmering strip above the mountain-tops, but growing, until it
plunged like a bolt into the dark canopy and passed high above them.
As it went it sent out a long shrill cry, the voice of a Nazgûl; but this
cry no longer held any terror for them: it was a cry of woe and dismay,
ill tidings for the Dark Tower. The Lord of the Ringwraiths had met
his doom.
‘What did I tell you? Something’s happening!’ cried Sam. ‘ ‘‘The
war’s going well,’’ said Shagrat; but Gorbag he wasn’t so sure. And
he was right there too. Things are looking up, Mr. Frodo. Haven’t
you got some hope now?’
‘Well no, not much, Sam,’ Frodo sighed. ‘That’s away beyond
the mountains. We’re going east not west. And I’m so tired. And the
Ring is so heavy, Sam. And I begin to see it in my mind all the time,
like a great wheel of ﬁre.’
Sam’s quick spirits sank again at once. He looked at his master
anxiously, and he took his hand. ‘Come, Mr. Frodo!’ he said. ‘I’ve
got one thing I wanted: a bit of light. Enough to help us, and yet I
guess it’s dangerous too. Try a bit further, and then we’ll lie close
and have a rest. But take a morsel to eat now, a bit of the Elves’
food; it may hearten you.’
*
*
*

920

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Sharing a wafer of lembas, and munching it as best they could with
their parched mouths, Frodo and Sam plodded on. The light, though
no more than a grey dusk, was now enough for them to see that they
were deep in the valley between the mountains. It sloped up gently
northward, and at its bottom went the bed of a now dry and withered
stream. Beyond its stony course they saw a beaten path that wound
its way under the feet of the westward cliffs. Had they known, they
could have reached it quicker, for it was a track that left the main
Morgul-road at the western bridge-end and went down by a long
stair cut in the rock to the valley’s bottom. It was used by patrols or by
messengers going swiftly to lesser posts and strongholds north-away,
between Cirith Ungol and the narrows of Isenmouthe, the iron jaws
of Carach Angren.
It was perilous for the hobbits to use such a path, but they needed
speed, and Frodo felt that he could not face the toil of scrambling
among the boulders or in the trackless glens of the Morgai. And he
judged that northward was, maybe, the way that their hunters would
least expect them to take. The road east to the plain, or the pass
back westward, those they would ﬁrst search most thoroughly. Only
when he was well north of the Tower did he mean to turn and seek
for some way to take him east, east on the last desperate stage of his
journey. So now they crossed the stony bed and took to the orc-path,
and for some time they marched along it. The cliffs at their left were
overhung, and they could not be seen from above; but the path made
many bends, and at each bend they gripped their sword-hilts and
went forward cautiously.
The light grew no stronger, for Orodruin was still belching forth
a great fume that, beaten upwards by the opposing airs, mounted
higher and higher, until it reached a region above the wind and spread
in an immeasurable roof, whose central pillar rose out of the shadows
beyond their view. They had trudged for more than an hour when
they heard a sound that brought them to a halt. Unbelievable, but
unmistakable. Water trickling. Out of a gully on the left, so sharp
and narrow that it looked as if the black cliff had been cloven by
some huge axe, water came dripping down: the last remains, maybe,
of some sweet rain gathered from sunlit seas, but ill-fated to fall at
last upon the walls of the Black Land and wander fruitless down into
the dust. Here it came out of the rock in a little falling streamlet,
and ﬂowed across the path, and turning south ran away swiftly to be
lost among the dead stones.
Sam sprang towards it. ‘If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell
her!’ he cried. ‘Light and now water!’ Then he stopped. ‘Let me
drink ﬁrst, Mr. Frodo,’ he said.
‘All right, but there’s room enough for two.’

THE LAND OF SHADOW

921

‘I didn’t mean that,’ said Sam. ‘I mean: if it’s poisonous, or something that will show its badness quick, well, better me than you,
master, if you understand me.’
‘I do. But I think we’ll trust our luck together, Sam; or our blessing.
Still, be careful now, if it’s very cold!’
The water was cool but not icy, and it had an unpleasant taste,
at once bitter and oily, or so they would have said at home. Here it
seemed beyond all praise, and beyond fear or prudence. They drank
their ﬁll, and Sam replenished his water-bottle. After that Frodo felt
easier, and they went on for several miles, until the broadening of
the road and the beginnings of a rough wall along its edge warned
them that they were drawing near to another orc-hold.
‘This is where we turn aside, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘And we must
turn east.’ He sighed as he looked at the gloomy ridges across the
valley. ‘I have just about enough strength left to ﬁnd some hole away
up there. And then I must rest a little.’
The river-bed was now some way below the path. They scrambled
down to it, and began to cross it. To their surprise they came upon
dark pools fed by threads of water trickling down from some source
higher up the valley. Upon its outer marges under the westward
mountains Mordor was a dying land, but it was not yet dead. And
here things still grew, harsh, twisted, bitter, struggling for life. In the
glens of the Morgai on the other side of the valley low scrubby trees
lurked and clung, coarse grey grass-tussocks fought with the stones,
and withered mosses crawled on them; and everywhere great writhing, tangled brambles sprawled. Some had long stabbing thorns, some
hooked barbs that rent like knives. The sullen shrivelled leaves of a
past year hung on them, grating and rattling in the sad airs, but their
maggot-ridden buds were only just opening. Flies, dun or grey, or
black, marked like orcs with a red eye-shaped blotch, buzzed and
stung; and above the briar-thickets clouds of hungry midges danced
and reeled.
‘Orc-gear’s no good,’ said Sam waving his arms. ‘I wish I’d got
an orc’s hide!’
At last Frodo could go no further. They had climbed up a narrow
shelving ravine, but they still had a long way to go before they could
even come in sight of the last craggy ridge. ‘I must rest now, Sam,
and sleep if I can,’ said Frodo. He looked about, but there seemed
nowhere even for an animal to crawl into in this dismal country. At
length, tired out, they slunk under a curtain of brambles that hung
down like a mat over a low rock-face.
There they sat and made such a meal as they could. Keeping back
the precious lembas for the evil days ahead, they ate the half of what

922

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

remained in Sam’s bag of Faramir’s provision: some dried fruit, and
a small slip of cured meat; and they sipped some water. They had
drunk again from the pools in the valley, but they were very thirsty
again. There was a bitter tang in the air of Mordor that dried the
mouth. When Sam thought of water even his hopeful spirit quailed.
Beyond the Morgai there was the dreadful plain of Gorgoroth to
cross.
‘Now you go to sleep ﬁrst, Mr. Frodo,’ he said. ‘It’s getting dark
again. I reckon this day is nearly over.’
Frodo sighed and was asleep almost before the words were spoken.
Sam struggled with his own weariness, and he took Frodo’s hand;
and there he sat silent till deep night fell. Then at last, to keep himself
awake, he crawled from the hiding-place and looked out. The land
seemed full of creaking and cracking and sly noises, but there was
no sound of voice or of foot. Far above the Ephel Dúath in the
West the night-sky was still dim and pale. There, peeping among the
cloud-wrack above a dark tor high up in the mountains, Sam saw a
white star twinkle for a while. The beauty of it smote his heart, as
he looked up out of the forsaken land, and hope returned to him.
For like a shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced him that in the
end the Shadow was only a small and passing thing: there was light
and high beauty for ever beyond its reach. His song in the Tower
had been deﬁance rather than hope; for then he was thinking of
himself. Now, for a moment, his own fate, and even his master’s,
ceased to trouble him. He crawled back into the brambles and laid
himself by Frodo’s side, and putting away all fear he cast himself
into a deep untroubled sleep.
They woke together, hand in hand. Sam was almost fresh, ready
for another day; but Frodo sighed. His sleep had been uneasy, full
of dreams of ﬁre, and waking brought him no comfort. Still his sleep
had not been without all healing virtue: he was stronger, more able
to bear his burden one stage further. They did not know the time,
nor how long they had slept; but after a morsel of food and a sip of
water they went on up the ravine, until it ended in a sharp slope of
screes and sliding stones. There the last living things gave up their
struggle; the tops of the Morgai were grassless, bare, jagged, barren
as a slate.
After much wandering and search they found a way that they could
climb, and with a last hundred feet of clawing scramble they were
up. They came to a cleft between two dark crags, and passing through
found themselves on the very edge of the last fence of Mordor. Below
them, at the bottom of a fall of some ﬁfteen hundred feet, lay the
inner plain stretching away into a formless gloom beyond their sight.

THE LAND OF SHADOW

923

The wind of the world blew now from the West, and the great clouds
were lifted high, ﬂoating away eastward; but still only a grey light
came to the dreary ﬁelds of Gorgoroth. There smokes trailed on the
ground and lurked in hollows, and fumes leaked from ﬁssures in the
earth.
Still far away, forty miles at least, they saw Mount Doom, its feet
founded in ashen ruin, its huge cone rising to a great height, where
its reeking head was swathed in cloud. Its ﬁres were now dimmed,
and it stood in smouldering slumber, as threatening and dangerous
as a sleeping beast. Behind it there hung a vast shadow, ominous as
a thunder-cloud, the veils of Barad-dûr that was reared far away upon
a long spur of the Ashen Mountains thrust down from the North.
The Dark Power was deep in thought, and the Eye turned inward,
pondering tidings of doubt and danger: a bright sword, and a stern
and kingly face it saw, and for a while it gave little thought to other
things; and all its great stronghold, gate on gate, and tower on tower,
was wrapped in a brooding gloom.
Frodo and Sam gazed out in mingled loathing and wonder on this
hateful land. Between them and the smoking mountain, and about
it north and south, all seemed ruinous and dead, a desert burned
and choked. They wondered how the Lord of this realm maintained
and fed his slaves and his armies. Yet armies he had. As far as their
eyes could reach, along the skirts of the Morgai and away southward,
there were camps, some of tents, some ordered like small towns. One
of the largest of these was right below them. Barely a mile out into
the plain it clustered like some huge nest of insects, with straight
dreary streets of huts and long low drab buildings. About it the
ground was busy with folk going to and fro; a wide road ran from it
south-east to join the Morgul-way, and along it many lines of small
black shapes were hurrying.
‘I don’t like the look of things at all,’ said Sam. ‘Pretty hopeless,
I call it – saving that where there’s such a lot of folk there must be
wells or water, not to mention food. And these are Men not Orcs,
or my eyes are all wrong.’
Neither he nor Frodo knew anything of the great slave-worked
ﬁelds away south in this wide realm, beyond the fumes of the Mountain by the dark sad waters of Lake Núrnen; nor of the great roads
that ran away east and south to tributary lands, from which the
soldiers of the Tower brought long waggon-trains of goods and booty
and fresh slaves. Here in the northward regions were the mines and
forges, and the musterings of long-planned war; and here the Dark
Power, moving its armies like pieces on the board, was gathering
them together. Its ﬁrst moves, the ﬁrst feelers of its strength, had
been checked upon its western line, southward and northward. For

924

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the moment it withdrew them, and brought up new forces, massing
them about Cirith Gorgor for an avenging stroke. And if it had also
been its purpose to defend the Mountain against all approach, it
could scarcely have done more.
‘Well!’ Sam went on. ‘Whatever they have to eat and drink, we
can’t get it. There’s no way down that I can see. And we couldn’t
cross all that open country crawling with enemies, even if we did get
down.’
‘Still we shall have to try,’ said Frodo. ‘It’s no worse than I
expected. I never hoped to get across. I can’t see any hope of it now.
But I’ve still got to do the best I can. At present that is to avoid being
captured as long as possible. So we must still go northwards, I think,
and see what it is like where the open plain is narrower.’
‘I guess what it’ll be like,’ said Sam. ‘Where it’s narrower the Orcs
and Men will just be packed closer. You’ll see, Mr. Frodo.’
‘I dare say I shall, if we ever get so far,’ said Frodo and turned
away.
They soon found that it was impossible to make their way along
the crest of the Morgai, or anywhere along its higher levels, pathless
as they were and scored with deep ghylls. In the end they were forced
to go back down the ravine that they had climbed and seek for a way
along the valley. It was rough going, for they dared not cross over to
the path on the westward side. After a mile or more they saw, huddled
in a hollow at the cliff ’s foot, the orc-hold that they had guessed was
near at hand: a wall and a cluster of stone huts set about the dark
mouth of a cave. There was no movement to be seen, but the hobbits
crept by cautiously, keeping as much as they could to the thorn-brakes
that grew thickly at this point along both sides of the old water-course.
They went two or three miles further, and the orc-hold was hidden
from sight behind them; but they had hardly begun to breathe more
freely again when harsh and loud they heard orc-voices. Quickly they
slunk out of sight behind a brown and stunted bush. The voices drew
nearer. Presently two orcs came into view. One was clad in ragged
brown and was armed with a bow of horn; it was of a small breed,
black-skinned, with wide and snufﬂing nostrils: evidently a tracker
of some kind. The other was a big ﬁghting-orc, like those of Shagrat’s
company, bearing the token of the Eye. He also had a bow at his
back and carried a short broad-headed spear. As usual they were
quarrelling, and being of different breeds they used the Common
Speech after their fashion.
Hardly twenty paces from where the hobbits lurked the small orc
stopped. ‘Nar!’ it snarled. ‘I’m going home.’ It pointed across the
valley to the orc-hold. ‘No good wearing my nose out on stones any

THE LAND OF SHADOW

925

more. There’s not a trace left, I say. I’ve lost the scent through giving
way to you. It went up into the hills, not along the valley, I tell you.’
‘Not much use are you, you little snufﬂers?’ said the big orc. ‘I
reckon eyes are better than your snotty noses.’
‘Then what have you seen with them?’ snarled the other. ‘Garn!
You don’t even know what you’re looking for.’
‘Whose blame’s that?’ said the soldier. ‘Not mine. That comes
from Higher Up. First they say it’s a great Elf in bright armour, then
it’s a sort of small dwarf-man, then it must be a pack of rebel Urukhai; or maybe it’s all the lot together.’
‘Ar!’ said the tracker. ‘They’ve lost their heads, that’s what it is.
And some of the bosses are going to lose their skins too, I guess, if
what I hear is true: Tower raided and all, and hundreds of your lads
done in, and prisoner got away. If that’s the way you ﬁghters go on,
small wonder there’s bad news from the battles.’
‘Who says there’s bad news?’ shouted the soldier.
‘Ar! Who says there isn’t?’
‘That’s cursed rebel-talk, and I’ll stick you, if you don’t shut it
down, see?’
‘All right, all right!’ said the tracker. ‘I’ll say no more and go on
thinking. But what’s the black sneak got to do with it all? That gobbler
with the ﬂapping hands?’
‘I don’t know. Nothing, maybe. But he’s up to no good, nosing
around, I’ll wager. Curse him! No sooner had he slipped us and run
off than word came he’s wanted alive, wanted quick.’
‘Well, I hope they get him and put him through it,’ growled the
tracker. ‘He messed up the scent back there, pinching that cast-off
mail-shirt that he found, and paddling all round the place before I
could get there.’
‘It saved his life anyhow,’ said the soldier. ‘Why, before I knew
he was wanted I shot him, as neat as neat, at ﬁfty paces right in the
back; but he ran on.’
‘Garn! You missed him,’ said the tracker. ‘First you shoot wild,
then you run too slow, and then you send for the poor trackers. I’ve
had enough of you.’ He loped off.
‘You come back,’ shouted the soldier, ‘or I’ll report you!’
‘Who to? Not to your precious Shagrat. He won’t be captain any
more.’
‘I’ll give your name and number to the Nazgûl,’ said the soldier
lowering his voice to a hiss. ‘One of them’s in charge at the Tower
now.’
The other halted, and his voice was full of fear and rage. ‘You
cursed peaching sneakthief !’ he yelled. ‘You can’t do your job, and
you can’t even stick by your own folk. Go to your ﬁlthy Shriekers,

926

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and may they freeze the ﬂesh off you! If the enemy doesn’t get them
ﬁrst. They’ve done in Number One, I’ve heard, and I hope it’s true!’
The big orc, spear in hand, leapt after him. But the tracker, springing behind a stone, put an arrow in his eye as he ran up, and he fell
with a crash. The other ran off across the valley and disappeared.
For a while the hobbits sat in silence. At length Sam stirred. ‘Well,
I call that neat as neat,’ he said. ‘If this nice friendliness would spread
about in Mordor, half our trouble would be over.’
‘Quietly, Sam,’ Frodo whispered. ‘There may be others about. We
have evidently had a very narrow escape, and the hunt was hotter on
our tracks than we guessed. But that is the spirit of Mordor, Sam;
and it has spread to every corner of it. Orcs have always behaved like
that, or so all tales say, when they are on their own. But you can’t
get much hope out of it. They hate us far more, altogether and all
the time. If those two had seen us, they would have dropped all their
quarrel until we were dead.’
There was another long silence. Sam broke it again, but with a
whisper this time. ‘Did you hear what they said about that gobbler,
Mr. Frodo? I told you Gollum wasn’t dead yet, didn’t I?’
‘Yes, I remember. And I wondered how you knew,’ said Frodo.
‘Well, come now! I think we had better not move out from here
again, until it has gone quite dark. So you shall tell me how you
know, and all about what happened. If you can do it quietly.’
‘I’ll try,’ said Sam, ‘but when I think of that Stinker I get so hot
I could shout.’
There the hobbits sat under the cover of the thorny bush, while
the drear light of Mordor faded slowly into a deep and starless night;
and Sam spoke into Frodo’s ear all that he could ﬁnd words for
of Gollum’s treacherous attack, the horror of Shelob, and his own
adventures with the orcs. When he had ﬁnished, Frodo said nothing
but took Sam’s hand and pressed it. At length he stirred.
‘Well, I suppose we must be going on again,’ he said. ‘I wonder
how long it will be before we really are caught and all the toiling and
the slinking will be over, and in vain.’ He stood up. ‘It’s dark, and
we cannot use the Lady’s glass. Keep it safe for me, Sam. I have
nowhere to keep it now, except in my hand, and I shall need both
hands in the blind night. But Sting I give to you. I have got an
orc-blade, but I do not think it will be my part to strike any blow
again.’
It was difﬁcult and dangerous moving in the night in the pathless
land; but slowly and with much stumbling the two hobbits toiled on
hour by hour northward along the eastern edge of the stony valley.

THE LAND OF SHADOW

927

When a grey light crept back over the western heights, long after day
had opened in the lands beyond, they went into hiding again and
slept a little, turn by turn. In his times of waking Sam was busy with
thoughts of food. At last when Frodo roused himself and spoke of
eating and making ready for yet another effort, he asked the question
that was troubling him most.
‘Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,’ he said, ‘but have you any
notion how far there is still to go?’
‘No, not any clear notion, Sam,’ Frodo answered. ‘In Rivendell
before I set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before
the Enemy came back here; but I only remember it vaguely. I remember clearest that there was a place in the north where the western
range and the northern range send out spurs that nearly meet. That
must be twenty leagues at least from the bridge back by the Tower.
It might be a good point at which to cross. But of course, if we get
there, we shall be further than we were from the Mountain, sixty
miles from it, I should think. I guess that we have gone about twelve
leagues north from the bridge now. Even if all goes well, I could
hardly reach the Mountain in a week. I am afraid, Sam, that the
burden will get very heavy, and I shall go still slower as we get nearer.’
Sam sighed. ‘That’s just as I feared,’ he said. ‘Well, to say nothing
of water, we’ve got to eat less, Mr. Frodo, or else move a bit quicker,
at any rate while we’re still in this valley. One more bite and all the
food’s ended, save the Elves’ waybread.’
‘I’ll try and be a bit quicker, Sam,’ said Frodo, drawing a deep
breath. ‘Come on then! Let’s start another march!’
It was not yet quite dark again. They plodded along, on into the
night. The hours passed in a weary stumbling trudge with a few brief
halts. At the ﬁrst hint of grey light under the skirts of the canopy of
shadow they hid themselves again in a dark hollow under an overhanging stone.
Slowly the light grew, until it was clearer than it yet had been. A
strong wind from the West was now driving the fumes of Mordor
from the upper airs. Before long the hobbits could make out the
shape of the land for some miles about them. The trough between
the mountains and the Morgai had steadily dwindled as it climbed
upwards, and the inner ridge was now no more than a shelf in the
steep faces of the Ephel Dúath; but to the east it fell as sheerly as
ever down into Gorgoroth. Ahead the water-course came to an end
in broken steps of rock; for out from the main range there sprang a
high barren spur, thrusting eastward like a wall. To meet it there
stretched out from the grey and misty northern range of Ered Lithui
a long jutting arm; and between the ends there was a narrow gap:

928

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Carach Angren, the Isenmouthe, beyond which lay the deep dale of
Udûn. In that dale behind the Morannon were the tunnels and deep
armouries that the servants of Mordor had made for the defence of
the Black Gate of their land; and there now their Lord was gathering
in haste great forces to meet the onslaught of the Captains of the
West. Upon the out-thrust spurs forts and towers were built, and
watch-ﬁres burned; and all across the gap an earth-wall had been
raised, and a deep trench delved that could be crossed only by a
single bridge.
A few miles north, high up in the angle where the western spur
branched away from the main range, stood the old castle of Durthang,
now one of the many orc-holds that clustered about the dale of Udûn.
A road, already visible in the growing light, came winding down from
it, until only a mile or two from where the hobbits lay it turned east
and ran along a shelf cut in the side of the spur, and so went down
into the plain, and on to the Isenmouthe.
To the hobbits as they looked out it seemed that all their journey
north had been useless. The plain to their right was dim and smoky,
and they could see there neither camps nor troops moving; but all
that region was under the vigilance of the forts of Carach Angren.
‘We have come to a dead end, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘If we go on, we
shall only come up to that orc-tower, but the only road to take is
that road that comes down from it – unless we go back. We can’t
climb up westward, or climb down eastward.’
‘Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘We must
take it and chance our luck, if there is any luck in Mordor. We might
as well give ourselves up as wander about any more, or try to go
back. Our food won’t last. We’ve got to make a dash for it!’
‘All right, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘Lead me! As long as you’ve got any
hope left. Mine is gone. But I can’t dash, Sam. I’ll just plod along
after you.’
‘Before you start any more plodding, you need sleep and food,
Mr. Frodo. Come and take what you can get of them!’
He gave Frodo water and an additional wafer of the waybread,
and he made a pillow of his cloak for his master’s head. Frodo was
too weary to debate the matter, and Sam did not tell him that he
had drunk the last drop of their water, and eaten Sam’s share of the
food as well as his own. When Frodo was asleep Sam bent over him
and listened to his breathing and scanned his face. It was lined and
thin, and yet in sleep it looked content and unafraid. ‘Well, here
goes, Master!’ Sam muttered to himself. ‘I’ll have to leave you for a
bit and trust to luck. Water we must have, or we’ll get no further.’
Sam crept out, and ﬂitting from stone to stone with more than
hobbit-care, he went down to the water-course, and then followed it

THE LAND OF SHADOW

929

for some way as it climbed north, until he came to the rock-steps
where long ago, no doubt, its spring had come gushing down in a
little waterfall. All now seemed dry and silent; but refusing to despair
Sam stooped and listened, and to his delight he caught the sound of
trickling. Clambering a few steps up he found a tiny stream of dark
water that came out from the hill-side and ﬁlled a little bare pool,
from which again it spilled, and vanished then under the barren
stones.
Sam tasted the water, and it seemed good enough. Then he drank
deeply, reﬁlled the bottle, and turned to go back. At that moment
he caught a glimpse of a black form or shadow ﬂitting among the
rocks away near Frodo’s hiding-place. Biting back a cry, he leapt
down from the spring and ran, jumping from stone to stone. It was
a wary creature, difﬁcult to see, but Sam had little doubt about it:
he longed to get his hands on its neck. But it heard him coming and
slipped quickly away. Sam thought he saw a last ﬂeeting glimpse of
it, peering back over the edge of the eastward precipice, before it
ducked and disappeared.
‘Well, luck did not let me down,’ muttered Sam, ‘but that was a
near thing! Isn’t it enough to have orcs by the thousand without that
stinking villain coming nosing round? I wish he had been shot!’ He
sat down by Frodo and did not rouse him; but he did not dare to
go to sleep himself. At last when he felt his eyes closing and knew
that his struggle to keep awake could not go on much longer, he
wakened Frodo gently.
‘That Gollum’s about again, I’m afraid, Mr. Frodo,’ he said.
‘Leastways, if it wasn’t him, then there’s two of him. I went away to
ﬁnd some water and spied him nosing round just as I turned back.
I reckon it isn’t safe for us both to sleep together, and begging your
pardon, but I can’t hold up my lids much longer.’
‘Bless you, Sam!’ said Frodo. ‘Lie down and take your proper
turn! But I’d rather have Gollum than orcs. At any rate he won’t
give us away to them – not unless he’s caught himself.’
‘But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on his own,’ growled
Sam. ‘Keep your eyes open, Mr. Frodo! There’s a bottle full of water.
Drink up. We can ﬁll it again when we go on.’ With that Sam plunged
into sleep.
Light was fading again when he woke. Frodo sat propped against
the rock behind, but he had fallen asleep. The water-bottle was
empty. There was no sign of Gollum.
Mordor-dark had returned, and the watch-ﬁres on the heights
burned ﬁerce and red, when the hobbits set out again on the most
dangerous stage of all their journey. They went ﬁrst to the little

930

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

spring, and then climbing warily up they came to the road at the
point where it swung east towards the Isenmouthe twenty miles away.
It was not a broad road, and it had no wall or parapet along the
edge, and as it ran on the sheer drop from its brink became deeper and
deeper. The hobbits could hear no movements, and after listening for
a while they set off eastward at a steady pace.
After doing some twelve miles, they halted. A short way back the
road had bent a little northward and the stretch that they had passed
over was now screened from sight. This proved disastrous. They
rested for some minutes and then went on; but they had not taken
many steps when suddenly in the stillness of the night they heard the
sound that all along they had secretly dreaded: the noise of marching
feet. It was still some way behind them, but looking back they could
see the twinkle of torches coming round the bend less than a mile
away, and they were moving fast: too fast for Frodo to escape by
ﬂight along the road ahead.
‘I feared it, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘We’ve trusted to luck, and it has
failed us. We’re trapped.’ He looked wildly up at the frowning wall,
where the road-builders of old had cut the rock sheer for many
fathoms above their heads. He ran to the other side and looked over
the brink into a dark pit of gloom. ‘We’re trapped at last!’ he said.
He sank to the ground beneath the wall of rock and bowed his head.
‘Seems so,’ said Sam. ‘Well, we can but wait and see.’ And with
that he sat down beside Frodo under the shadow of the cliff.
They did not have to wait long. The orcs were going at a great
pace. Those in the foremost ﬁles bore torches. On they came, red
ﬂames in the dark, swiftly growing. Now Sam too bowed his head,
hoping that it would hide his face when the torches reached them;
and he set their shields before their knees to hide their feet.
‘If only they are in a hurry and will let a couple of tired soldiers
alone and pass on!’ he thought.
And so it seemed that they would. The leading orcs came loping
along, panting, holding their heads down. They were a gang of the
smaller breeds being driven unwilling to their Dark Lord’s wars; all
they cared for was to get the march over and escape the whip. Beside
them, running up and down the line, went two of the large ﬁerce
uruks, cracking lashes and shouting. File after ﬁle passed, and the
tell-tale torchlight was already some way ahead. Sam held his breath.
Now more than half the line had gone by. Then suddenly one of the
slave-drivers spied the two ﬁgures by the road-side. He ﬂicked a whip
at them and yelled: ‘Hi, you! Get up!’ They did not answer, and with
a shout he halted the whole company.
‘Come on, you slugs!’ he cried. ‘This is no time for slouching.’
He took a step towards them, and even in the gloom he recognized

THE LAND OF SHADOW

931

the devices on their shields. ‘Deserting, eh?’ he snarled. ‘Or thinking
of it? All your folk should have been inside Udûn before yesterday
evening. You know that. Up you get and fall in, or I’ll have your
numbers and report you.’
They struggled to their feet, and keeping bent, limping like footsore
soldiers, they shufﬂed back towards the rear of the line. ‘No, not at
the rear!’ the slave-driver shouted. ‘Three ﬁles up. And stay there,
or you’ll know it, when I come down the line!’ He sent his long
whip-lash cracking over their heads; then with another crack and a
yell he started the company off again at a brisk trot.
It was hard enough for poor Sam, tired as he was; but for Frodo
it was a torment, and soon a nightmare. He set his teeth and tried
to stop his mind from thinking, and he struggled on. The stench of
the sweating orcs about him was stiﬂing, and he began to gasp with
thirst. On, on they went, and he bent all his will to draw his breath
and to make his legs keep going; and yet to what evil end he toiled
and endured he did not dare to think. There was no hope of falling
out unseen. Now and again the orc-driver fell back and jeered at
them.
‘There now!’ he laughed, ﬂicking at their legs. ‘Where there’s a
whip there’s a will, my slugs. Hold up! I’d give you a nice freshener
now, only you’ll get as much lash as your skins will carry when you
come in late to your camp. Do you good. Don’t you know we’re at
war?’
They had gone some miles, and the road was at last running down
a long slope into the plain, when Frodo’s strength began to give out
and his will wavered. He lurched and stumbled. Desperately Sam
tried to help him and hold him up, though he felt that he could
himself hardly stay the pace much longer. At any moment now he
knew that the end would come: his master would faint or fall, and
all would be discovered, and their bitter efforts be in vain. ‘I’ll have
that big slave-driving devil anyway,’ he thought.
Then just as he was putting his hand to the hilt of his sword, there
came an unexpected relief. They were out on the plain now and
drawing near the entrance to Udûn. Some way in front of it, before
the gate at the bridge-end, the road from the west converged with
others coming from the south, and from Barad-dûr. Along all the
roads troops were moving; for the Captains of the West were advancing and the Dark Lord was speeding his forces north. So it chanced
that several companies came together at the road-meeting, in the
dark beyond the light of the watch-ﬁres on the wall. At once there
was great jostling and cursing as each troop tried to get ﬁrst to the
gate and the ending of their march. Though the drivers yelled and

932

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

plied their whips, scufﬂes broke out and some blades were drawn. A
troop of heavy-armed uruks from Barad-dûr charged into the Durthang line and threw them into confusion.
Dazed as he was with pain and weariness, Sam woke up, grasped
quickly at his chance, and threw himself to the ground, dragging
Frodo down with him. Orcs fell over them, snarling and cursing.
Slowly on hand and knee the hobbits crawled away out of the turmoil,
until at last unnoticed they dropped over the further edge of the road.
It had a high kerb by which troop-leaders could guide themselves in
black night or fog, and it was banked up some feet above the level
of the open land.
They lay still for a while. It was too dark to seek for cover, if
indeed there was any to ﬁnd; but Sam felt that they ought at least to
get further away from the highways and out of the range of torchlight.
‘Come on, Mr. Frodo!’ he whispered. ‘One more crawl, and then
you can lie still.’
With a last despairing effort Frodo raised himself on his hands,
and struggled on for maybe twenty yards. Then he pitched down
into a shallow pit that opened unexpectedly before them, and there
he lay like a dead thing.

Chapter 3
MOUNT DOOM
Sam put his ragged orc-cloak under his master’s head, and covered
them both with the grey robe of Lórien; and as he did so his thoughts
went out to that fair land, and to the Elves, and he hoped that the
cloth woven by their hands might have some virtue to keep them
hidden beyond all hope in this wilderness of fear. He heard the
scufﬂing and cries die down as the troops passed on through the
Isenmouthe. It seemed that in the confusion and the mingling of
many companies of various kinds they had not been missed, not yet
at any rate.
Sam took a sip of water, but pressed Frodo to drink, and when
his master had recovered a little he gave him a whole wafer of their
precious waybread and made him eat it. Then, too worn out even to
feel much fear, they stretched themselves out. They slept a little in
uneasy ﬁts; for their sweat grew chill on them, and the hard stones
bit them, and they shivered. Out of the north from the Black Gate
through Cirith Gorgor there ﬂowed whispering along the ground a
thin cold air.
In the morning a grey light came again, for in the high regions the
West Wind still blew, but down on the stones behind the fences of
the Black Land the air seemed almost dead, chill and yet stiﬂing.
Sam looked up out of the hollow. The land all about was dreary, ﬂat
and drab-hued. On the roads nearby nothing was moving now; but
Sam feared the watchful eyes on the wall of the Isenmouthe, no more
than a furlong away northward. South-eastward, far off like a dark
standing shadow, loomed the Mountain. Smokes were pouring from
it, and while those that rose into the upper air trailed away eastward,
great rolling clouds ﬂoated down its sides and spread over the land.
A few miles to the north-east the foothills of the Ashen Mountains
stood like sombre grey ghosts, behind which the misty northern
heights rose like a line of distant cloud hardly darker than the lowering
sky.
Sam tried to guess the distances and to decide what way they
ought to take. ‘It looks every step of ﬁfty miles,’ he muttered gloomily,
staring at the threatening mountain, ‘and that’ll take a week, if it
takes a day, with Mr. Frodo as he is.’ He shook his head, and as he
worked things out, slowly a new dark thought grew in his mind.
Never for long had hope died in his staunch heart, and always until
now he had taken some thought for their return. But the bitter truth

934

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

came home to him at last: at best their provision would take them
to their goal; and when the task was done, there they would come
to an end, alone, houseless, foodless in the midst of a terrible desert.
There could be no return.
‘So that was the job I felt I had to do when I started,’ thought
Sam: ‘to help Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well,
if that is the job then I must do it. But I would dearly like to see
Bywater again, and Rosie Cotton and her brothers, and the Gaffer
and Marigold and all. I can’t think somehow that Gandalf would
have sent Mr. Frodo on this errand, if there hadn’t a’ been any hope
of his ever coming back at all. Things all went wrong when he went
down in Moria. I wish he hadn’t. He would have done something.’
But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to die, it was turned to
a new strength. Sam’s plain hobbit-face grew stern, almost grim, as
the will hardened in him, and he felt through all his limbs a thrill,
as if he was turning into some creature of stone and steel that neither
despair nor weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue.
With a new sense of responsibility he brought his eyes back to the
ground near at hand, studying the next move. As the light grew a
little he saw to his surprise that what from a distance had seemed
wide and featureless ﬂats were in fact all broken and tumbled. Indeed
the whole surface of the plains of Gorgoroth was pocked with great
holes, as if, while it was still a waste of soft mud, it had been smitten
with a shower of bolts and huge slingstones. The largest of these
holes were rimmed with ridges of broken rock, and broad ﬁssures
ran out from them in all directions. It was a land in which it would
be possible to creep from hiding to hiding, unseen by all but the
most watchful eyes: possible at least for one who was strong and had
no need for speed. For the hungry and worn, who had far to go
before life failed, it had an evil look.
Thinking of all these things Sam went back to his master. He had
no need to rouse him. Frodo was lying on his back with eyes open,
staring at the cloudy sky. ‘Well, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam, ‘I’ve been
having a look round and thinking a bit. There’s nothing on the roads,
and we’d best be getting away while there’s a chance. Can you manage it?’
‘I can manage it,’ said Frodo. ‘I must.’
Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, ﬂitting
behind such cover as they could ﬁnd, but moving always in a slant
towards the foothills of the northern range. But as they went the
most easterly of the roads followed them, until it ran off, hugging
the skirts of the mountains, away into a wall of black shadow far
ahead. Neither man nor orc now moved along its ﬂat grey stretches;

MOUNT DOOM

935

for the Dark Lord had almost completed the movement of his forces,
and even in the fastness of his own realm he sought the secrecy of
night, fearing the winds of the world that had turned against him,
tearing aside his veils, and troubled with tidings of bold spies that
had passed through his fences.
The hobbits had gone a few weary miles when they halted. Frodo
seemed nearly spent. Sam saw that he could not go much further in
this fashion, crawling, stooping, now picking a doubtful way very
slowly, now hurrying at a stumbling run.
‘I’m going back on to the road while the light lasts, Mr. Frodo,’
he said. ‘Trust to luck again! It nearly failed us last time, but it didn’t
quite. A steady pace for a few more miles, and then a rest.’
He was taking a far greater risk than he knew; but Frodo was too
much occupied with his burden and with the struggle in his mind to
debate, and almost too hopeless to care. They climbed on to the
causeway and trudged along, down the hard cruel road that led to
the Dark Tower itself. But their luck held, and for the rest of that
day they met no living or moving thing; and when night fell they
vanished into the darkness of Mordor. All the land now brooded as
at the coming of a great storm: for the Captains of the West had
passed the Cross-roads and set ﬂames in the deadly ﬁelds of Imlad
Morgul.
So the desperate journey went on, as the Ring went south and the
banners of the kings rode north. For the hobbits each day, each mile,
was more bitter than the one before, as their strength lessened and
the land became more evil. They met no enemies by day. At times
by night, as they cowered or drowsed uneasily in some hiding beside
the road, they heard cries and the noise of many feet or the swift
passing of some cruelly ridden steed. But far worse than all such
perils was the ever-approaching threat that beat upon them as they
went: the dreadful menace of the Power that waited, brooding in
deep thought and sleepless malice behind the dark veil about its
Throne. Nearer and nearer it drew, looming blacker, like the oncoming of a wall of night at the last end of the world.
There came at last a dreadful nightfall; and even as the Captains
of the West drew near to the end of the living lands, the two wanderers
came to an hour of blank despair. Four days had passed since they
had escaped from the orcs, but the time lay behind them like an
ever-darkening dream. All this last day Frodo had not spoken, but
had walked half-bowed, often stumbling, as if his eyes no longer saw
the way before his feet. Sam guessed that among all their pains he
bore the worst, the growing weight of the Ring, a burden on the body
and a torment to his mind. Anxiously Sam had noted how his master’s
left hand would often be raised as if to ward off a blow, or to screen

936

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

his shrinking eyes from a dreadful Eye that sought to look in them.
And sometimes his right hand would creep to his breast, clutching,
and then slowly, as the will recovered mastery, it would be withdrawn.
Now as the blackness of night returned Frodo sat, his head
between his knees, his arms hanging wearily to the ground where his
hands lay feebly twitching. Sam watched him, till night covered them
both and hid them from one another. He could no longer ﬁnd any
words to say; and he turned to his own dark thoughts. As for himself,
though weary and under a shadow of fear, he still had some strength
left. The lembas had a virtue without which they would long ago have
lain down to die. It did not satisfy desire, and at times Sam’s mind
was ﬁlled with the memories of food, and the longing for simple
bread and meats. And yet this waybread of the Elves had a potency
that increased as travellers relied on it alone and did not mingle it
with other foods. It fed the will, and it gave strength to endure, and
to master sinew and limb beyond the measure of mortal kind. But
now a new decision must be made. They could not follow this road
any longer; for it went on eastward into the great Shadow, but the
Mountain now loomed upon their right, almost due south, and they
must turn towards it. Yet still before it there stretched a wide region
of fuming, barren, ash-ridden land.
‘Water, water!’ muttered Sam. He had stinted himself, and in his
parched mouth his tongue seemed thick and swollen; but for all his
care they now had very little left, perhaps half his bottle, and maybe
there were still days to go. All would long ago have been spent, if
they had not dared to follow the orc-road. For at long intervals on
that highway cisterns had been built for the use of troops sent in
haste through the waterless regions. In one Sam had found some
water left, stale, muddied by the orcs, but still sufﬁcient for their
desperate case. Yet that was now a day ago. There was no hope of
any more.
At last wearied with his cares Sam drowsed, leaving the morrow
till it came; he could do no more. Dream and waking mingled
uneasily. He saw lights like gloating eyes, and dark creeping shapes,
and he heard noises as of wild beasts or the dreadful cries of tortured
things; and he would start up to ﬁnd the world all dark and only
empty blackness all about him. Once only, as he stood and stared
wildly round, did it seem that, though now awake, he could still see
pale lights like eyes; but soon they ﬂickered and vanished.
The hateful night passed slowly and reluctantly. Such daylight as
followed was dim; for here as the Mountain drew near the air was
ever mirky, while out from the Dark Tower there crept the veils of
Shadow that Sauron wove about himself. Frodo was lying on his

MOUNT DOOM

937

back not moving. Sam stood beside him, reluctant to speak, and yet
knowing that the word now lay with him: he must set his master’s
will to work for another effort. At length, stooping and caressing
Frodo’s brow, he spoke in his ear.
‘Wake up, Master!’ he said. ‘Time for another start.’
As if roused by a sudden bell, Frodo rose quickly, and stood up
and looked away southwards; but when his eyes beheld the Mountain
and the desert he quailed again.
‘I can’t manage it, Sam,’ he said. ‘It is such a weight to carry,
such a weight.’
Sam knew before he spoke, that it was vain, and that such words
might do more harm than good, but in his pity he could not keep
silent. ‘Then let me carry it a bit for you, Master,’ he said. ‘You
know I would, and gladly, as long as I have any strength.’
A wild light came into Frodo’s eyes. ‘Stand away! Don’t touch
me!’ he cried. ‘It is mine, I say. Be off !’ His hand strayed to his
sword-hilt. But then quickly his voice changed. ‘No, no, Sam,’ he
said sadly. ‘But you must understand. It is my burden, and no one
else can bear it. It is too late now, Sam dear. You can’t help me in
that way again. I am almost in its power now. I could not give it up,
and if you tried to take it I should go mad.’
Sam nodded. ‘I understand,’ he said. ‘But I’ve been thinking, Mr.
Frodo, there’s other things we might do without. Why not lighten
the load a bit? We’re going that way now, as straight as we can make
it.’ He pointed to the Mountain. ‘It’s no good taking anything we’re
not sure to need.’
Frodo looked again towards the Mountain. ‘No,’ he said, ‘we
shan’t need much on that road. And at its end nothing.’ Picking up
his orc-shield he ﬂung it away and threw his helmet after it. Then
pulling off the grey cloak he undid the heavy belt and let it fall to
the ground, and the sheathed sword with it. The shreds of the black
cloak he tore off and scattered.
‘There, I’ll be an orc no more,’ he cried, ‘and I’ll bear no weapon,
fair or foul. Let them take me, if they will!’
Sam did likewise, and put aside his orc-gear; and he took out all
the things in his pack. Somehow each of them had become dear to
him, if only because he had borne them so far with so much toil.
Hardest of all it was to part with his cooking-gear. Tears welled in
his eyes at the thought of casting it away.
‘Do you remember that bit of rabbit, Mr. Frodo?’ he said. ‘And
our place under the warm bank in Captain Faramir’s country, the
day I saw an oliphaunt?’
‘No, I am afraid not, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘At least, I know that such
things happened, but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of

938

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

water, no sound of wind, no memory of tree or grass or ﬂower, no
image of moon or star are left to me. I am naked in the dark, Sam,
and there is no veil between me and the wheel of ﬁre. I begin to see
it even with my waking eyes, and all else fades.’
Sam went to him and kissed his hand. ‘Then the sooner we’re rid
of it, the sooner to rest,’ he said haltingly, ﬁnding no better words
to say. ‘Talking won’t mend nothing,’ he muttered to himself, as he
gathered up all the things that they had chosen to cast away. He was
not willing to leave them lying open in the wilderness for any eyes
to see. ‘Stinker picked up that orc-shirt, seemingly, and he isn’t going
to add a sword to it. His hands are bad enough when empty. And
he isn’t going to mess with my pans!’ With that he carried all the
gear away to one of the many gaping ﬁssures that scored the land
and threw them in. The clatter of his precious pans as they fell down
into the dark was like a death-knell to his heart.
He came back to Frodo, and then of his elven-rope he cut a short
piece to serve his master as a girdle and bind the grey cloak close
about his waist. The rest he carefully coiled and put back in his pack.
Beside that he kept only the remnants of their waybread and the
water-bottle, and Sting still hanging by his belt; and hidden away in
a pocket of his tunic next his breast the phial of Galadriel and the
little box that she gave him for his own.
Now at last they turned their faces to the Mountain and set out,
thinking no more of concealment, bending their weariness and failing
wills only to the one task of going on. In the dimness of its dreary
day few things even in that land of vigilance could have espied them,
save from close at hand. Of all the slaves of the Dark Lord, only the
Nazgûl could have warned him of the peril that crept, small but
indomitable, into the very heart of his guarded realm. But the Nazgûl
and their black wings were abroad on other errand: they were gathered far away, shadowing the march of the Captains of the West,
and thither the thought of the Dark Tower was turned.
That day it seemed to Sam that his master had found some new
strength, more than could be explained by the small lightening of
the load that he had to carry. In the ﬁrst marches they went further
and faster than he had hoped. The land was rough and hostile, and
yet they made much progress, and ever the Mountain drew nearer.
But as the day wore on and all too soon the dim light began to fail,
Frodo stooped again, and began to stagger, as if the renewed effort
had squandered his remaining strength.
At their last halt he sank down and said: ‘I’m thirsty, Sam,’ and
did not speak again. Sam gave him a mouthful of water; only one
more mouthful remained. He went without himself; and now as once

MOUNT DOOM

939

more the night of Mordor closed over them, through all his thoughts
there came the memory of water; and every brook or stream or fount
that he had ever seen, under green willow-shades or twinkling in the
sun, danced and rippled for his torment behind the blindness of his
eyes. He felt the cool mud about his toes as he paddled in the Pool
at Bywater with Jolly Cotton and Tom and Nibs, and their sister
Rosie. ‘But that was years ago,’ he sighed, ‘and far away. The way
back, if there is one, goes past the Mountain.’
He could not sleep and he held a debate with himself. ‘Well, come
now, we’ve done better than you hoped,’ he said sturdily. ‘Began
well anyway. I reckon we crossed half the distance before we stopped.
One more day will do it.’ And then he paused.
‘Don’t be a fool, Sam Gamgee,’ came an answer in his own voice.
‘He won’t go another day like that, if he moves at all. And you can’t
go on much longer giving him all the water and most of the food.’
‘I can go on a good way though, and I will.’
‘Where to?’
‘To the Mountain, of course.’
‘But what then, Sam Gamgee, what then? When you get there,
what are you going to do? He won’t be able to do anything for
himself.’
To his dismay Sam realized that he had not got an answer to this.
He had no clear idea at all. Frodo had not spoken much to him of
his errand, and Sam only knew vaguely that the Ring had somehow
to be put into the ﬁre. ‘The Cracks of Doom,’ he muttered, the old
name rising to his mind. ‘Well, if Master knows how to ﬁnd them,
I don’t.’
‘There you are!’ came the answer. ‘It’s all quite useless. He said
so himself. You are the fool, going on hoping and toiling. You could
have lain down and gone to sleep together days ago, if you hadn’t
been so dogged. But you’ll die just the same, or worse. You might
just as well lie down now and give it up. You’ll never get to the top
anyway.’
‘I’ll get there, if I leave everything but my bones behind,’ said
Sam. ‘And I’ll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and
heart. So stop arguing!’
At that moment Sam felt a tremor in the ground beneath him,
and he heard or sensed a deep remote rumble as of thunder
imprisoned under the earth. There was a brief red ﬂame that ﬂickered
under the clouds and died away. The Mountain too slept uneasily.
The last stage of their journey to Orodruin came, and it was a
torment greater than Sam had ever thought that he could bear. He
was in pain, and so parched that he could no longer swallow even a

940

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

mouthful of food. It remained dark, not only because of the smokes of
the Mountain: there seemed to be a storm coming up, and away to
the south-east there was a shimmer of lightnings under the black skies.
Worst of all, the air was full of fumes; breathing was painful and
difﬁcult, and a dizziness came on them, so that they staggered and
often fell. And yet their wills did not yield, and they struggled on.
The Mountain crept up ever nearer, until, if they lifted their heavy
heads, it ﬁlled all their sight, looming vast before them: a huge mass
of ash and slag and burned stone, out of which a sheer-sided cone
was raised into the clouds. Before the daylong dusk ended and true
night came again they had crawled and stumbled to its very feet.
With a gasp Frodo cast himself on the ground. Sam sat by him.
To his surprise he felt tired but lighter, and his head seemed clear
again. No more debates disturbed his mind. He knew all the arguments of despair and would not listen to them. His will was set, and
only death would break it. He felt no longer either desire or need of
sleep, but rather of watchfulness. He knew that all the hazards and
perils were now drawing together to a point: the next day would be
a day of doom, the day of ﬁnal effort or disaster, the last gasp.
But when would it come? The night seemed endless and timeless,
minute after minute falling dead and adding up to no passing hour,
bringing no change. Sam began to wonder if a second darkness had
begun and no day would ever reappear. At last he groped for Frodo’s
hand. It was cold and trembling. His master was shivering.
‘I didn’t ought to have left my blanket behind,’ muttered Sam;
and lying down he tried to comfort Frodo with his arms and body.
Then sleep took him, and the dim light of the last day of their quest
found them side by side. The wind had fallen the day before as it
shifted from the West, and now it came from the North and began
to rise; and slowly the light of the unseen Sun ﬁltered down into the
shadows where the hobbits lay.
‘Now for it! Now for the last gasp!’ said Sam as he struggled to
his feet. He bent over Frodo, rousing him gently. Frodo groaned;
but with a great effort of will he staggered up; and then he fell upon
his knees again. He raised his eyes with difﬁculty to the dark slopes
of Mount Doom towering above him, and then pitifully he began to
crawl forward on his hands.
Sam looked at him and wept in his heart, but no tears came to
his dry and stinging eyes. ‘I said I’d carry him, if it broke my back,’
he muttered, ‘and I will!’
‘Come, Mr. Frodo!’ he cried. ‘I can’t carry it for you, but I can
carry you and it as well. So up you get! Come on, Mr. Frodo dear!
Sam will give you a ride. Just tell him where to go, and he’ll go.’

MOUNT DOOM

941

As Frodo clung upon his back, arms loosely about his neck, legs
clasped ﬁrmly under his arms, Sam staggered to his feet; and then
to his amazement he felt the burden light. He had feared that he
would have barely strength to lift his master alone, and beyond that
he had expected to share in the dreadful dragging weight of the
accursed Ring. But it was not so. Whether because Frodo was so
worn by his long pains, wound of knife, and venomous sting, and
sorrow, fear, and homeless wandering, or because some gift of ﬁnal
strength was given to him, Sam lifted Frodo with no more difﬁculty
than if he were carrying a hobbit-child pig-a-back in some romp on
the lawns or hayﬁelds of the Shire. He took a deep breath and started
off.
They had reached the Mountain’s foot on its northern side, and
a little to the westward; there its long grey slopes, though broken,
were not sheer. Frodo did not speak, and so Sam struggled on as
best he could, having no guidance but the will to climb as high as
might be before his strength gave out and his will broke. On he
toiled, up and up, turning this way and that to lessen the slope, often
stumbling forward, and at the last crawling like a snail with a heavy
burden on its back. When his will could drive him no further, and
his limbs gave way, he stopped and laid his master gently down.
Frodo opened his eyes and drew a breath. It was easier to breathe
up here above the reeks that coiled and drifted down below. ‘Thank
you, Sam,’ he said in a cracked whisper. ‘How far is there to go?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Sam, ‘because I don’t know where we’re
going.’
He looked back, and then he looked up; and he was amazed to
see how far his last effort had brought him. The Mountain standing
ominous and alone had looked taller than it was. Sam saw now that
it was less lofty than the high passes of the Ephel Dúath which he
and Frodo had scaled. The confused and tumbled shoulders of its
great base rose for maybe three thousand feet above the plain, and
above them was reared half as high again its tall central cone, like a
vast oast or chimney capped with a jagged crater. But already Sam
was more than half way up the base, and the plain of Gorgoroth was
dim below him, wrapped in fume and shadow. As he looked up he
would have given a shout, if his parched throat had allowed him; for
amid the rugged humps and shoulders above him he saw plainly a
path or road. It climbed like a rising girdle from the west and wound
snakelike about the Mountain, until before it went round out of view
it reached the foot of the cone upon its eastern side.
Sam could not see the course immediately above him, where it
was lowest, for a steep slope went up from where he stood; but he

942

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

guessed that if he could only struggle on just a little way further up,
they would strike this path. A gleam of hope returned to him. They
might conquer the Mountain yet. ‘Why, it might have been put there
a-purpose!’ he said to himself. ‘If it wasn’t there, I’d have to say I
was beaten in the end.’
The path was not put there for the purposes of Sam. He did not
know it, but he was looking at Sauron’s Road from Barad-dûr to the
Sammath Naur, the Chambers of Fire. Out from the Dark Tower’s
huge western gate it came over a deep abyss by a vast bridge of iron,
and then passing into the plain it ran for a league between two
smoking chasms, and so reached a long sloping causeway that led
up on to the Mountain’s eastern side. Thence, turning and encircling
all its wide girth from south to north, it climbed at last, high in the
upper cone, but still far from the reeking summit, to a dark entrance
that gazed back east straight to the Window of the Eye in Sauron’s
shadow-mantled fortress. Often blocked or destroyed by the tumults
of the Mountain’s furnaces, always that road was repaired and cleared
again by the labours of countless orcs.
Sam drew a deep breath. There was a path, but how he was to
get up the slope to it he did not know. First he must ease his aching
back. He lay ﬂat beside Frodo for a while. Neither spoke. Slowly the
light grew. Suddenly a sense of urgency which he did not understand
came to Sam. It was almost as if he had been called: ‘Now, now, or
it will be too late!’ He braced himself and got up. Frodo also seemed
to have felt the call. He struggled to his knees.
‘I’ll crawl, Sam,’ he gasped.
So foot by foot, like small grey insects, they crept up the slope.
They came to the path and found that it was broad, paved with
broken rubble and beaten ash. Frodo clambered on to it, and then
moved as if by some compulsion he turned slowly to face the East.
Far off the shadows of Sauron hung; but torn by some gust of wind
out of the world, or else moved by some great disquiet within, the
mantling clouds swirled, and for a moment drew aside; and then he
saw, rising black, blacker and darker than the vast shades amid which
it stood, the cruel pinnacles and iron crown of the topmost tower of
Barad-dûr. One moment only it stared out, but as from some great
window immeasurably high there stabbed northward a ﬂame of red,
the ﬂicker of a piercing Eye; and then the shadows were furled again
and the terrible vision was removed. The Eye was not turned to them:
it was gazing north to where the Captains of the West stood at bay,
and thither all its malice was now bent, as the Power moved to strike
its deadly blow; but Frodo at that dreadful glimpse fell as one stricken
mortally. His hand sought the chain about his neck.
Sam knelt by him. Faint, almost inaudibly, he heard Frodo whis-

MOUNT DOOM

943

pering: ‘Help me, Sam! Help me, Sam! Hold my hand! I can’t stop
it.’ Sam took his master’s hands and laid them together, palm to
palm, and kissed them; and then he held them gently between his
own. The thought came suddenly to him: ‘He’s spotted us! It’s all
up, or it soon will be. Now, Sam Gamgee, this is the end of ends.’
Again he lifted Frodo and drew his hands down to his own breast,
letting his master’s legs dangle. Then he bowed his head and struggled
off along the climbing road. It was not as easy a way to take as it
had looked at ﬁrst. By fortune the ﬁres that had poured forth in the
great turmoils when Sam stood upon Cirith Ungol had ﬂowed down
mainly on the southern and western slopes, and the road on this side
was not blocked. Yet in many places it had crumbled away or was
crossed by gaping rents. After climbing eastward for some time it
bent back upon itself at a sharp angle and went westward for a space.
There at the bend it was cut deep through a crag of old weathered
stone once long ago vomited from the Mountain’s furnaces. Panting
under his load Sam turned the bend; and even as he did so, out of
the corner of his eye, he had a glimpse of something falling from the
crag, like a small piece of black stone that had toppled off as he
passed.
A sudden weight smote him and he crashed forward, tearing the
backs of his hands that still clasped his master’s. Then he knew what
had happened, for above him as he lay he heard a hated voice.
‘Wicked masster!’ it hissed. ‘Wicked masster cheats us; cheats
Sméagol, gollum. He musstn’t go that way. He musstn’t hurt Preciouss. Give it to Sméagol, yess, give it to us! Give it to uss!’
With a violent heave Sam rose up. At once he drew his sword;
but he could do nothing. Gollum and Frodo were locked together.
Gollum was tearing at his master, trying to get at the chain and the
Ring. This was probably the only thing that could have roused the
dying embers of Frodo’s heart and will: an attack, an attempt to
wrest his treasure from him by force. He fought back with a sudden
fury that amazed Sam, and Gollum also. Even so things might have
gone far otherwise, if Gollum himself had remained unchanged; but
whatever dreadful paths, lonely and hungry and waterless, he had
trodden, driven by a devouring desire and a terrible fear, they had
left grievous marks on him. He was a lean, starved, haggard thing,
all bones and tight-drawn sallow skin. A wild light ﬂamed in his eyes,
but his malice was no longer matched by his old griping strength.
Frodo ﬂung him off and rose up quivering.
‘Down, down!’ he gasped, clutching his hand to his breast, so that
beneath the cover of his leather shirt he clasped the Ring. ‘Down,
you creeping thing, and out of my path! Your time is at an end. You
cannot betray me or slay me now.’

944

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Then suddenly, as before under the eaves of the Emyn Muil, Sam
saw these two rivals with other vision. A crouching shape, scarcely
more than the shadow of a living thing, a creature now wholly ruined
and defeated, yet ﬁlled with a hideous lust and rage; and before it
stood stern, untouchable now by pity, a ﬁgure robed in white, but
at its breast it held a wheel of ﬁre. Out of the ﬁre there spoke a
commanding voice.
‘Begone, and trouble me no more! If you touch me ever again,
you shall be cast yourself into the Fire of Doom.’
The crouching shape backed away, terror in its blinking eyes, and
yet at the same time insatiable desire.
Then the vision passed and Sam saw Frodo standing, hand on
breast, his breath coming in great gasps, and Gollum at his feet,
resting on his knees with his wide-splayed hands upon the ground.
‘Look out!’ cried Sam. ‘He’ll spring!’ He stepped forward, brandishing his sword. ‘Quick, Master!’ he gasped. ‘Go on! Go on! No
time to lose. I’ll deal with him. Go on!’
Frodo looked at him as if at one now far away. ‘Yes, I must go
on,’ he said. ‘Farewell, Sam! This is the end at last. On Mount Doom
doom shall fall. Farewell!’ He turned and went on, walking slowly
but erect, up the climbing path.
‘Now!’ said Sam. ‘At last I can deal with you!’ He leaped forward
with drawn blade ready for battle. But Gollum did not spring. He
fell ﬂat upon the ground and whimpered.
‘Don’t kill us,’ he wept. ‘Don’t hurt us with nassty cruel steel! Let
us live, yes, live just a little longer. Lost lost! We’re lost. And when
Precious goes we’ll die, yes, die into the dust.’ He clawed up the
ashes of the path with his long ﬂeshless ﬁngers. ‘Dusst!’ he hissed.
Sam’s hand wavered. His mind was hot with wrath and the
memory of evil. It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous
creature, just and many times deserved; and also it seemed the only
safe thing to do. But deep in his heart there was something that
restrained him: he could not strike this thing lying in the dust, forlorn,
ruinous, utterly wretched. He himself, though only for a little while,
had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed the agony of Gollum’s
shrivelled mind and body, enslaved to that Ring, unable to ﬁnd peace
or relief ever in life again. But Sam had no words to express what he
felt.
‘Oh, curse you, you stinking thing!’ he said. ‘Go away! Be off ! I
don’t trust you, not as far as I could kick you; but be off. Or I shall
hurt you, yes, with nasty cruel steel.’
Gollum got up on all fours, and backed away for several paces,
and then he turned, and as Sam aimed a kick at him he ﬂed away

MOUNT DOOM

945

down the path. Sam gave no more heed to him. He suddenly
remembered his master. He looked up the path and could not see
him. As fast as he could he trudged up the road. If he had looked
back, he might have seen not far below Gollum turn again, and then
with a wild light of madness glaring in his eyes come, swiftly but
warily, creeping on behind, a slinking shadow among the stones.
The path climbed on. Soon it bent again and with a last eastward
course passed in a cutting along the face of the cone and came to
the dark door in the Mountain’s side, the door of the Sammath Naur.
Far away now rising towards the South the sun, piercing the smokes
and haze, burned ominous, a dull bleared disc of red; but all Mordor
lay about the Mountain like a dead land, silent, shadow-folded, waiting for some dreadful stroke.
Sam came to the gaping mouth and peered in. It was dark and
hot, and a deep rumbling shook the air. ‘Frodo! Master!’ he called.
There was no answer. For a moment he stood, his heart beating with
wild fears, and then he plunged in. A shadow followed him.
At ﬁrst he could see nothing. In his great need he drew out once
more the phial of Galadriel, but it was pale and cold in his trembling
hand and threw no light into that stiﬂing dark. He was come to the
heart of the realm of Sauron and the forges of his ancient might,
greatest in Middle-earth; all other powers were here subdued. Fearfully he took a few uncertain steps in the dark, and then all at once
there came a ﬂash of red that leaped upward, and smote the high
black roof. Then Sam saw that he was in a long cave or tunnel that
bored into the Mountain’s smoking cone. But only a short way ahead
its ﬂoor and the walls on either side were cloven by a great ﬁssure,
out of which the red glare came, now leaping up, now dying down
into darkness; and all the while far below there was a rumour and a
trouble as of great engines throbbing and labouring.
The light sprang up again, and there on the brink of the chasm,
at the very Crack of Doom, stood Frodo, black against the glare,
tense, erect, but still as if he had been turned to stone.
‘Master!’ cried Sam.
Then Frodo stirred and spoke with a clear voice, indeed with a
voice clearer and more powerful than Sam had ever heard him use,
and it rose above the throb and turmoil of Mount Doom, ringing in
the roof and walls.
‘I have come,’ he said. ‘But I do not choose now to do what I
came to do. I will not do this deed. The Ring is mine!’ And suddenly,
as he set it on his ﬁnger, he vanished from Sam’s sight. Sam gasped,
but he had no chance to cry out, for at that moment many things
happened.

946

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Something struck Sam violently in the back, his legs were knocked
from under him and he was ﬂung aside, striking his head against the
stony ﬂoor, as a dark shape sprang over him. He lay still and for a
moment all went black.
And far away, as Frodo put on the Ring and claimed it for his
own, even in Sammath Naur the very heart of his realm, the Power
in Barad-dûr was shaken, and the Tower trembled from its foundations to its proud and bitter crown. The Dark Lord was suddenly
aware of him, and his Eye piercing all shadows looked across the
plain to the door that he had made; and the magnitude of his own
folly was revealed to him in a blinding ﬂash, and all the devices of
his enemies were at last laid bare. Then his wrath blazed in consuming
ﬂame, but his fear rose like a vast black smoke to choke him. For he
knew his deadly peril and the thread upon which his doom now hung.
From all his policies and webs of fear and treachery, from all his
stratagems and wars his mind shook free; and throughout his realm a
tremor ran, his slaves quailed, and his armies halted, and his captains
suddenly steerless, bereft of will, wavered and despaired. For they
were forgotten. The whole mind and purpose of the Power that
wielded them was now bent with overwhelming force upon the
Mountain. At his summons, wheeling with a rending cry, in a last
desperate race there ﬂew, faster than the winds, the Nazgûl, the
Ringwraiths, and with a storm of wings they hurtled southwards to
Mount Doom.
Sam got up. He was dazed, and blood streaming from his head
dripped in his eyes. He groped forward, and then he saw a strange
and terrible thing. Gollum on the edge of the abyss was ﬁghting like
a mad thing with an unseen foe. To and fro he swayed, now so near
the brink that almost he tumbled in, now dragging back, falling to
the ground, rising, and falling again. And all the while he hissed but
spoke no words.
The ﬁres below awoke in anger, the red light blazed, and all the
cavern was ﬁlled with a great glare and heat. Suddenly Sam saw
Gollum’s long hands draw upwards to his mouth; his white fangs
gleamed, and then snapped as they bit. Frodo gave a cry, and there
he was, fallen upon his knees at the chasm’s edge. But Gollum,
dancing like a mad thing, held aloft the ring, a ﬁnger still thrust
within its circle. It shone now as if verily it was wrought of living ﬁre.
‘Precious, precious, precious!’ Gollum cried. ‘My Precious! O my
Precious!’ And with that, even as his eyes were lifted up to gloat on
his prize, he stepped too far, toppled, wavered for a moment on the
brink, and then with a shriek he fell. Out of the depths came his last
wail Precious, and he was gone.

MOUNT DOOM

947

There was a roar and a great confusion of noise. Fires leaped up
and licked the roof. The throbbing grew to a great tumult, and the
Mountain shook. Sam ran to Frodo and picked him up and carried
him out to the door. And there upon the dark threshold of the Sammath Naur, high above the plains of Mordor, such wonder and terror
came on him that he stood still forgetting all else, and gazed as one
turned to stone.
A brief vision he had of swirling cloud, and in the midst of it
towers and battlements, tall as hills, founded upon a mighty mountain-throne above immeasurable pits; great courts and dungeons,
eyeless prisons sheer as cliffs, and gaping gates of steel and adamant:
and then all passed. Towers fell and mountains slid; walls crumbled
and melted, crashing down; vast spires of smoke and spouting steams
went billowing up, up, until they toppled like an overwhelming wave,
and its wild crest curled and came foaming down upon the land.
And then at last over the miles between there came a rumble, rising
to a deafening crash and roar; the earth shook, the plain heaved and
cracked, and Orodruin reeled. Fire belched from its riven summit.
The skies burst into thunder seared with lightning. Down like lashing
whips fell a torrent of black rain. And into the heart of the storm,
with a cry that pierced all other sounds, tearing the clouds asunder,
the Nazgûl came, shooting like ﬂaming bolts, as caught in the ﬁery
ruin of hill and sky they crackled, withered, and went out.
‘Well, this is the end, Sam Gamgee,’ said a voice by his side. And
there was Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his
eyes there was peace now, neither strain of will, nor madness, nor
any fear. His burden was taken away. There was the dear master of
the sweet days in the Shire.
‘Master!’ cried Sam, and fell upon his knees. In all that ruin of
the world for the moment he felt only joy, great joy. The burden was
gone. His master had been saved; he was himself again, he was free.
And then Sam caught sight of the maimed and bleeding hand.
‘Your poor hand!’ he said. ‘And I have nothing to bind it with, or
comfort it. I would have spared him a whole hand of mine rather.
But he’s gone now beyond recall, gone for ever.’
‘Yes,’ said Frodo. ‘But do you remember Gandalf ’s words: Even
Gollum may have something yet to do? But for him, Sam, I could not
have destroyed the Ring. The Quest would have been in vain, even
at the bitter end. So let us forgive him! For the Quest is achieved,
and now all is over. I am glad you are here with me. Here at the end
of all things, Sam.’

950

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Then come, and let your brother go with us, and some other of
your folk who is most swift! For we have need of speed greater than
any wind, outmatching the wings of the Nazgûl.’
‘The North Wind blows, but we shall outﬂy it,’ said Gwaihir.
And he lifted up Gandalf and sped away south, and with him went
Landroval, and Meneldor young and swift. And they passed over
Udûn and Gorgoroth and saw all the land in ruin and tumult beneath
them, and before them Mount Doom blazing, pouring out its ﬁre.
‘I am glad that you are here with me,’ said Frodo. ‘Here at the
end of all things, Sam.’
‘Yes, I am with you, Master,’ said Sam, laying Frodo’s wounded
hand gently to his breast. ‘And you’re with me. And the journey’s
ﬁnished. But after coming all that way I don’t want to give up yet.
It’s not like me, somehow, if you understand.’
‘Maybe not, Sam,’ said Frodo; ‘but it’s like things are in the world.
Hopes fail. An end comes. We have only a little time to wait now.
We are lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.’
‘Well, Master, we could at least go further from this dangerous
place here, from this Crack of Doom, if that’s its name. Now couldn’t
we? Come, Mr. Frodo, let’s go down the path at any rate!’
‘Very well, Sam. If you wish to go, I’ll come,’ said Frodo; and
they rose and went slowly down the winding road; and even as they
passed towards the Mountain’s quaking feet, a great smoke and steam
belched from the Sammath Naur, and the side of the cone was riven
open, and a huge ﬁery vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down
the eastern mountain-side.
Frodo and Sam could go no further. Their last strength of mind
and body was swiftly ebbing. They had reached a low ashen hill piled
at the Mountain’s foot; but from it there was no more escape. It was
an island now, not long to endure, amid the torment of Orodruin.
All about it the earth gaped, and from deep rifts and pits smoke and
fumes leaped up. Behind them the Mountain was convulsed. Great
rents opened in its side. Slow rivers of ﬁre came down the long slopes
towards them. Soon they would be engulfed. A rain of hot ash was
falling.
They stood now; and Sam still holding his master’s hand caressed
it. He sighed. ‘What a tale we have been in, Mr. Frodo, haven’t we?’
he said. ‘I wish I could hear it told! Do you think they’ll say: Now
comes the story of Nine-ﬁngered Frodo and the Ring of Doom? And then
everyone will hush, like we did, when in Rivendell they told us the
tale of Beren One-hand and the Great Jewel. I wish I could hear it!
And I wonder how it will go on after our part.’
But even while he spoke so, to keep fear away until the very last,

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

951

his eyes still strayed north, north into the eye of the wind, to where
the sky far off was clear, as the cold blast, rising to a gale, drove back
the darkness and the ruin of the clouds.
And so it was that Gwaihir saw them with his keen far-seeing eyes,
as down the wild wind he came, and daring the great peril of the
skies he circled in the air: two small dark ﬁgures, forlorn, hand in
hand upon a little hill, while the world shook under them, and gasped,
and rivers of ﬁre drew near. And even as he espied them and came
swooping down, he saw them fall, worn out, or choked with fumes
and heat, or stricken down by despair at last, hiding their eyes from
death.
Side by side they lay; and down swept Gwaihir, and down came
Landroval and Meneldor the swift; and in a dream, not knowing
what fate had befallen them, the wanderers were lifted up and borne
far away out of the darkness and the ﬁre.
When Sam awoke, he found that he was lying on some soft bed,
but over him gently swayed wide beechen boughs, and through their
young leaves sunlight glimmered, green and gold. All the air was full
of a sweet mingled scent.
He remembered that smell: the fragrance of Ithilien. ‘Bless me!’
he mused. ‘How long have I been asleep?’ For the scent had borne
him back to the day when he had lit his little ﬁre under the sunny
bank; and for the moment all else between was out of waking memory.
He stretched and drew a deep breath. ‘Why, what a dream I’ve had!’
he muttered. ‘I am glad to wake!’ He sat up and then he saw that
Frodo was lying beside him, and slept peacefully, one hand behind
his head, and the other resting upon the coverlet. It was the right
hand, and the third ﬁnger was missing.
Full memory ﬂooded back, and Sam cried aloud: ‘It wasn’t a
dream! Then where are we?’
And a voice spoke softly behind him: ‘In the land of Ithilien, and
in the keeping of the King; and he awaits you.’ With that Gandalf
stood before him, robed in white, his beard now gleaming like pure
snow in the twinkling of the leafy sunlight. ‘Well, Master Samwise,
how do you feel?’ he said.
But Sam lay back, and stared with open mouth, and for a moment,
between bewilderment and great joy, he could not answer. At last he
gasped: ‘Gandalf ! I thought you were dead! But then I thought I was
dead myself. Is everything sad going to come untrue? What’s happened to the world?’
‘A great Shadow has departed,’ said Gandalf, and then he laughed,
and the sound was like music, or like water in a parched land; and

952

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

as he listened the thought came to Sam that he had not heard laughter, the pure sound of merriment, for days upon days without count.
It fell upon his ears like the echo of all the joys he had ever known.
But he himself burst into tears. Then, as a sweet rain will pass down
a wind of spring and the sun will shine out the clearer, his tears
ceased, and his laughter welled up, and laughing he sprang from his
bed.
‘How do I feel?’ he cried. ‘Well, I don’t know how to say it. I feel,
I feel’ – he waved his arms in the air – ‘I feel like spring after winter,
and sun on the leaves; and like trumpets and harps and all the songs
I have ever heard!’ He stopped and he turned towards his master.
‘But how’s Mr. Frodo?’ he said. ‘Isn’t it a shame about his poor
hand? But I hope he’s all right otherwise. He’s had a cruel time.’
‘Yes, I am all right otherwise,’ said Frodo, sitting up and laughing
in his turn. ‘I fell asleep again waiting for you, Sam, you sleepy-head.
I was awake early this morning, and now it must be nearly noon.’
‘Noon?’ said Sam, trying to calculate. ‘Noon of what day?’
‘The fourteenth of the New Year,’ said Gandalf; ‘or if you like,
the eighth day of April in the Shire-reckoning.* But in Gondor the
New Year will always now begin upon the twenty-ﬁfth of March
when Sauron fell, and when you were brought out of the ﬁre to the
King. He has tended you, and now he awaits you. You shall eat and
drink with him. When you are ready I will lead you to him.’
‘The King?’ said Sam. ‘What king, and who is he?’
‘The King of Gondor and Lord of the Western Lands,’ said
Gandalf; ‘and he has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride
soon to his crowning, but he waits for you.’
‘What shall we wear?’ said Sam; for all he could see was the old
and tattered clothes that they had journeyed in, lying folded on the
ground beside their beds.
‘The clothes that you wore on your way to Mordor,’ said Gandalf.
‘Even the orc-rags that you bore in the black land, Frodo, shall be
preserved. No silks and linens, nor any armour or heraldry could be
more honourable. But later I will ﬁnd some other clothes, perhaps.’
Then he held out his hands to them, and they saw that one shone
with light. ‘What have you got there?’ Frodo cried. ‘Can it be——?’
‘Yes, I have brought your two treasures. They were found on Sam
when you were rescued, the Lady Galadriel’s gifts: your glass, Frodo,
and your box, Sam. You will be glad to have these safe again.’
When they were washed and clad, and had eaten a light meal, the
Hobbits followed Gandalf. They stepped out of the beech-grove in
* There were thirty days in March (or Rethe) in the Shire calendar.

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

953

which they had lain, and passed on to a long green lawn, glowing in
sunshine, bordered by stately dark-leaved trees laden with scarlet
blossom. Behind them they could hear the sound of falling water,
and a stream ran down before them between ﬂowering banks, until
it came to a greenwood at the lawn’s foot and passed then on under
an archway of trees, through which they saw the shimmer of water
far away.
As they came to the opening in the wood, they were surprised to
see knights in bright mail and tall guards in silver and black standing
there, who greeted them with honour and bowed before them. And
then one blew a long trumpet, and they went on through the aisle
of trees beside the singing stream. So they came to a wide green land,
and beyond it was a broad river in a silver haze, out of which rose a
long wooded isle, and many ships lay by its shores. But on the ﬁeld
where they now stood a great host was drawn up, in ranks and
companies glittering in the sun. And as the Hobbits approached
swords were unsheathed, and spears were shaken, and horns and
trumpets sang, and men cried with many voices and in many tongues:
‘Long live the Halﬂings! Praise them with great praise!
Cuio i Pheriain anann! Aglar’ni Pheriannath!
Praise them with great praise, Frodo and Samwise!
Daur a Berhael, Conin en Annûn! Eglerio!
Praise them!
Eglerio!
A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet!
Praise them!
Cormacolindor, a laita tárienna!
Praise them! The Ring-bearers, praise them with great praise!’
And so the red blood blushing in their faces and their eyes shining
with wonder, Frodo and Sam went forward and saw that amidst the
clamorous host were set three high-seats built of green turves. Behind
the seat upon the right ﬂoated, white on green, a great horse running
free; upon the left was a banner, silver upon blue, a ship swan-prowed
faring on the sea; but behind the highest throne in the midst of all a
great standard was spread in the breeze, and there a white tree
ﬂowered upon a sable ﬁeld beneath a shining crown and seven glittering stars. On the throne sat a mail-clad man, a great sword was laid
across his knees, but he wore no helm. As they drew near he rose.
And then they knew him, changed as he was, so high and glad of
face, kingly, lord of Men, dark-haired with eyes of grey.
Frodo ran to meet him, and Sam followed close behind. ‘Well, if
this isn’t the crown of all!’ he said. ‘Strider, or I’m still asleep!’

954

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Yes, Sam, Strider,’ said Aragorn. ‘It is a long way, is it not, from
Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all,
but yours has been the darkest road.’
And then to Sam’s surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee
before them; and taking them by the hand, Frodo upon his right and
Sam upon his left, he led them to the throne, and setting them upon
it, he turned to the men and captains who stood by and spoke, so
that his voice rang over all the host, crying:
‘Praise them with great praise!’
And when the glad shout had swelled up and died away again, to
Sam’s ﬁnal and complete satisfaction and pure joy, a minstrel of
Gondor stood forth, and knelt, and begged leave to sing. And behold!
he said:
‘Lo! lords and knights and men of valour unashamed, kings and
princes, and fair people of Gondor, and Riders of Rohan, and ye
sons of Elrond, and Dúnedain of the North, and Elf and Dwarf, and
greathearts of the Shire, and all free folk of the West, now listen to
my lay. For I will sing to you of Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the
Ring of Doom.’
And when Sam heard that he laughed aloud for sheer delight, and
he stood up and cried: ‘O great glory and splendour! And all my
wishes have come true!’ And then he wept.
And all the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their
merriment and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver
and gold, and all men were hushed. And he sang to them, now in
the elven-tongue, now in the speech of the West, until their hearts,
wounded with sweet words, overﬂowed, and their joy was like swords,
and they passed in thought out to regions where pain and delight
ﬂow together and tears are the very wine of blessedness.
And at the last, as the Sun fell from the noon and the shadows of
the trees lengthened, he ended. ‘Praise them with great praise!’ he
said and knelt. And then Aragorn stood up, and all the host arose,
and they passed to pavilions made ready, to eat and drink and make
merry while the day lasted.
Frodo and Sam were led apart and brought to a tent, and there
their old raiment was taken off, but folded and set aside with honour;
and clean linen was given to them. Then Gandalf came and in his
arms, to the wonder of Frodo, he bore the sword and the elven-cloak
and the mithril-coat that had been taken from him in Mordor. For
Sam he brought a coat of gilded mail, and his elven-cloak all healed
of the soils and hurts that it had suffered; and then he laid before
them two swords.
‘I do not wish for any sword,’ said Frodo.

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

955

‘Tonight at least you should wear one,’ said Gandalf.
Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and
had been laid at his side in Cirith Ungol. ‘Sting I gave to you Sam,’
he said.
‘No, master! Mr. Bilbo gave it to you, and it goes with his silver
coat; he would not wish anyone else to wear it now.’
Frodo gave way; and Gandalf, as if he were their esquire, knelt
and girt the sword-belts about them, and then rising he set circlets
of silver upon their heads. And when they were arrayed they went
to the great feast; and they sat at the King’s table with Gandalf,
´
and King Eomer
of Rohan, and the Prince Imrahil and all the chief
captains; and there also were Gimli and Legolas.
But when, after the Standing Silence, wine was brought there came
in two esquires to serve the kings; or so they seemed to be: one was
clad in the silver and sable of the Guards of Minas Tirith, and the
other in white and green. But Sam wondered what such young boys
were doing in an army of mighty men. Then suddenly as they drew
near and he could see them plainly, he exclaimed:
‘Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn’t Pippin. Mr.
Peregrin Took I should say, and Mr. Merry! How they have grown!
Bless me! But I can see there’s more tales to tell than ours.’
‘There are indeed,’ said Pippin turning towards him. ‘And we’ll
begin telling them, as soon as this feast is ended. In the meantime
you can try Gandalf. He’s not so close as he used to be, though he
laughs now more than he talks. For the present Merry and I are busy.
We are knights of the City and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.’
At last the glad day ended; and when the Sun was gone and the
round Moon rode slowly above the mists of Anduin and ﬂickered
through the ﬂuttering leaves, Frodo and Sam sat under the whispering
trees amid the fragrance of fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into
the night with Merry and Pippin and Gandalf, and after a while
Legolas and Gimli joined them. There Frodo and Sam learned much
of all that had happened to the Company after their fellowship was
broken on the evil day at Parth Galen by Rauros Falls; and still there
was always more to ask and more to tell.
Orcs, and talking trees, and leagues of grass, and galloping riders,
and glittering caves, and white towers and golden halls, and battles,
and tall ships sailing, all these passed before Sam’s mind until he felt
bewildered. But amidst all these wonders he returned always to his
astonishment at the size of Merry and Pippin; and he made them
stand back to back with Frodo and himself. He scratched his head.
‘Can’t understand it at your age!’ he said. ‘But there it is: you’re
three inches taller than you ought to be, or I’m a dwarf.’

956

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘That you certainly are not,’ said Gimli. ‘But what did I say?
Mortals cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come
of them than of a pot of beer.’
‘Ent-draughts?’ said Sam. ‘There you go about Ents again; but
what they are beats me. Why, it will take weeks before we get all
these things sized up!’
‘Weeks indeed,’ said Pippin. ‘And then Frodo will have to be
locked up in a tower in Minas Tirith and write it all down. Otherwise
he will forget half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.’
At length Gandalf rose. ‘The hands of the King are hands of
healing, dear friends,’ he said. ‘But you went to the very brink of
death ere he recalled you, putting forth all his power, and sent you
into the sweet forgetfulness of sleep. And though you have indeed
slept long and blessedly, still it is now time to sleep again.’
‘And not only Sam and Frodo here,’ said Gimli, ‘but you too,
Pippin. I love you, if only because of the pains you have cost me,
which I shall never forget. Nor shall I forget ﬁnding you on the hill
of the last battle. But for Gimli the Dwarf you would have been lost
then. But at least I know now the look of a hobbit’s foot, though it
be all that can be seen under a heap of bodies. And when I heaved
that great carcase off you, I made sure you were dead. I could have
torn out my beard. And it is only a day yet since you were ﬁrst up
and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.’
‘And I,’ said Legolas, ‘shall walk in the woods of this fair land,
which is rest enough. In days to come, if my Elven-lord allows, some
of our folk shall remove hither; and when we come it shall be blessed,
for a while. For a while: a month, a life, a hundred years of Men.
But Anduin is near, and Anduin leads down to the Sea. To the Sea!
To the Sea, to the Sea! The white gulls are crying,
The wind is blowing, and the white foam is ﬂying.
West, west away, the round sun is falling.
Grey ship, grey ship, do you hear them calling,
The voices of my people that have gone before me?
I will leave, I will leave the woods that bore me;
For our days are ending and our years failing.
I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing.
Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling,
Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling,
In Eressëa, in Elvenhome that no man can discover,
Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever!’

THE FIELD OF CORMALLEN

957

And so singing Legolas went away down the hill.
Then the others also departed, and Frodo and Sam went to their
beds and slept. And in the morning they rose again in hope and
peace; and they spent many days in Ithilien. For the Field of
Cormallen, where the host was now encamped, was near to Henneth
Annûn, and the stream that ﬂowed from its falls could be heard in
the night as it rushed down through its rocky gate, and passed through
the ﬂowery meads into the tides of Anduin by the Isle of Cair Andros.
The hobbits wandered here and there visiting again the places that
they had passed before; and Sam hoped always in some shadow of
the woods or secret glade to catch, maybe, a glimpse of the great
Oliphaunt. And when he learned that at the siege of Gondor there
had been a great number of these beasts but that they were all
destroyed, he thought it a sad loss.
‘Well, one can’t be everywhere at once, I suppose,’ he said. ‘But
I missed a lot, seemingly.’
In the meanwhile the host made ready for the return to Minas
Tirith. The weary rested and the hurt were healed. For some had
laboured and fought much with the remnants of the Easterlings and
Southrons, until all were subdued. And, latest of all, those returned
who had passed into Mordor and destroyed the fortresses in the north
of the land.
But at the last when the month of May was drawing near the
Captains of the West set out again; and they went aboard ship with
all their men, and they sailed from Cair Andros down Anduin to
Osgiliath; and there they remained for one day; and the day after
they came to the green ﬁelds of the Pelennor and saw again the white
towers under tall Mindolluin, the City of the Men of Gondor, last
memory of Westernesse, that had passed through the darkness and
ﬁre to a new day.
And there in the midst of the ﬁelds they set up their pavilions and
awaited the morning; for it was the Eve of May, and the King would
enter his gates with the rising of the Sun.

966

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Stewards, bright argent like snow in the sun, bearing no charge nor
device, was raised over Gondor for the last time.
Now the Captains of the West led their host towards the City,
and folk saw them advance in line upon line, ﬂashing and glinting in
the sunrise and rippling like silver. And so they came before the
Gateway and halted a furlong from the walls. As yet no gates had
been set up again, but a barrier was laid across the entrance to the
City, and there stood men at arms in silver and black with long
swords drawn. Before the barrier stood Faramir the Steward, and
Húrin Warden of the Keys, and other captains of Gondor, and the
´
Lady Eowyn
of Rohan with Elfhelm the Marshal and many knights
of the Mark; and upon either side of the Gate was a great press of
fair people in raiment of many colours and garlands of ﬂowers.
So now there was a wide space before the walls of Minas Tirith,
and it was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the soldiers
of Gondor and of Rohan, and by the people of the City and of all
parts of the land. A hush fell upon all as out from the host stepped
the Dúnedain in silver and grey; and before them came walking slow
the Lord Aragorn. He was clad in black mail girt with silver, and he
wore a long mantle of pure white clasped at the throat with a great
jewel of green that shone from afar; but his head was bare save for
a star upon his forehead bound by a slender ﬁllet of silver. With him
´
were Eomer
of Rohan, and the Prince Imrahil, and Gandalf robed
all in white, and four small ﬁgures that many men marvelled to see.
‘Nay, cousin! they are not boys,’ said Ioreth to her kinswoman
from Imloth Melui, who stood beside her. ‘Those are Periain, out of
the far country of the Halﬂings, where they are princes of great fame,
it is said. I should know, for I had one to tend in the Houses. They
are small, but they are valiant. Why, cousin, one of them went with
only his esquire into the Black Country and fought with the Dark
Lord all by himself, and set ﬁre to his Tower, if you can believe it.
At least that is the tale in the City. That will be the one that walks
with our Elfstone. They are dear friends, I hear. Now he is a marvel,
the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech, mind you, but he has
a golden heart, as the saying is; and he has the healing hands. ‘‘The
hands of the king are the hands of a healer’’, I said; and that was
how it was all discovered. And Mithrandir, he said to me: ‘‘Ioreth,
men will long remember your words’’, and——’
But Ioreth was not permitted to continue the instruction of her
kinswoman from the country, for a single trumpet rang, and a dead
silence followed. Then forth from the Gate went Faramir with Húrin
of the Keys, and no others, save that behind them walked four men
in the high helms and armour of the Citadel, and they bore a great
casket of black lebethron bound with silver.

970

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

went the sons of Elrond. All the road was lined with people to do
them honour and praise them, from the Gate of the City to the walls
of the Pelennor. Then all others that dwelt afar went back to their
homes rejoicing; but in the City there was labour of many willing
hands to rebuild and renew and to remove all the scars of war and
the memory of the darkness.
The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and
Gimli; for Aragorn was loth for the fellowship to be dissolved. ‘At
last all such things must end,’ he said, ‘but I would have you wait a
little while longer: for the end of the deeds that you have shared in
has not yet come. A day draws near that I have looked for in all the
years of my manhood, and when it comes I would have my friends
beside me.’ But of that day he would say no more.
In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair
house with Gandalf, and they went to and fro as they wished. And
Frodo said to Gandalf: ‘Do you know what this day is that Aragorn
speaks of ? For we are happy here, and I don’t wish to go; but the
days are running away, and Bilbo is waiting; and the Shire is my
home.’
‘As for Bilbo,’ said Gandalf, ‘he is waiting for the same day, and
he knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is
now only May and high summer is not yet in; and though all things
may seem changed, as if an age of the world had gone by, yet to the
trees and the grass it is less than a year since you set out.’
‘Pippin,’ said Frodo, ‘didn’t you say that Gandalf was less close
than of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is
recovering.’
And Gandalf said: ‘Many folk like to know beforehand what is to
be set on the table; but those who have laboured to prepare the feast
like to keep their secret; for wonder makes the words of praise louder.
And Aragorn himself waits for a sign.’
There came a day when Gandalf could not be found, and the
Companions wondered what was going forward. But Gandalf took
Aragorn out from the City by night, and he brought him to the
southern feet of Mount Mindolluin; and there they found a path
made in ages past that few now dared to tread. For it led up on to
the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had been wont
to go. And they went up by steep ways, until they came to a high
ﬁeld below the snows that clad the lofty peaks, and it looked down
over the precipice that stood behind the City. And standing there
they surveyed the lands, for the morning was come; and they saw
the towers of the City far below them like white pencils touched by
the sunlight, and all the Vale of Anduin was like a garden, and the

MANY PARTINGS

975

you may pass into the West, until all your wounds and weariness are
healed. But wear this now in memory of Elfstone and Evenstar with
whom your life has been woven!’
And she took a white gem like a star that lay upon her breast
hanging upon a silver chain, and she set the chain about Frodo’s
neck. ‘When the memory of the fear and the darkness troubles you,’
she said, ‘this will bring you aid.’
´
In three days, as the King had said, Eomer
of Rohan came riding
to the City, and with him came an éored of the fairest knights of the
Mark. He was welcomed; and when they sat all at table in Merethrond, the Great Hall of Feasts, he beheld the beauty of the ladies
that he saw and was ﬁlled with great wonder. And before he went to
his rest he sent for Gimli the Dwarf, and he said to him: ‘Gimli
Glóin’s son, have you your axe ready?’
‘Nay, lord,’ said Gimli, ‘but I can speedily fetch it, if there be
need.’
´
‘You shall judge,’ said Eomer.
‘For there are certain rash words
concerning the Lady in the Golden Wood that lie still between us.
And now I have seen her with my eyes.’
‘Well, lord,’ said Gimli, ‘and what say you now?’
´
‘Alas!’ said Eomer.
‘I will not say that she is the fairest lady that
lives.’
‘Then I must go for my axe,’ said Gimli.
´
‘But ﬁrst I will plead this excuse,’ said Eomer.
‘Had I seen her in
other company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now
I will put Queen Arwen Evenstar ﬁrst, and I am ready to do battle
on my own part with any who deny me. Shall I call for my sword?’
Then Gimli bowed low. ‘Nay, you are excused for my part, lord,’
he said. ‘You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the
Morning. And my heart forebodes that soon it will pass away for
ever.’
At last the day of departure came, and a great and fair company
made ready to ride north from the City. Then the kings of Gondor
and Rohan went to the Hallows and they came to the tombs in Rath
Dı́nen, and they bore away King Théoden upon a golden bier, and
passed through the City in silence. Then they laid the bier upon a
great wain with Riders of Rohan all about it and his banner borne
before; and Merry being Théoden’s esquire rode upon the wain and
kept the arms of the king.
For the other Companions steeds were furnished according to
their stature; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn’s side, and
Gandalf rode upon Shadowfax, and Pippin rode with the knights of

982

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Well, good-bye!’ he said. ‘And don’t forget that if you hear any
news of the Entwives in your land, you will send word to me.’ Then
he waved his great hands to all the company and went off into the
trees.
The travellers now rode with more speed, and they made their way
towards the Gap of Rohan; and Aragorn took leave of them at last
close to that very place where Pippin had looked into the Stone of
Orthanc. The Hobbits were grieved at this parting; for Aragorn had
never failed them and he had been their guide through many perils.
‘I wish we could have a Stone that we could see all our friends
in,’ said Pippin, ‘and that we could speak to them from far away!’
‘Only one now remains that you could use,’ answered Aragorn;
‘for you would not wish to see what the Stone of Minas Tirith would
show you. But the Palantı́r of Orthanc the King will keep, to see
what is passing in his realm, and what his servants are doing. For do
not forget, Peregrin Took, that you are a knight of Gondor, and I
do not release you from your service. You are going now on leave,
but I may recall you. And remember, dear friends of the Shire, that
my realm lies also in the North, and I shall come there one day.’
Then Aragorn took leave of Celeborn and Galadriel; and the Lady
said to him: ‘Elfstone, through darkness you have come to your hope,
and have now all your desire. Use well the days!’
But Celeborn said: ‘Kinsman, farewell! May your doom be other
than mine, and your treasure remain with you to the end!’
With that they parted, and it was then the time of sunset; and
when after a while they turned and looked back, they saw the King
of the West sitting upon his horse with his knights about him; and
the falling Sun shone upon them and made all their harness to gleam
like red gold, and the white mantle of Aragorn was turned to a ﬂame.
Then Aragorn took the green stone and held it up, and there came
a green ﬁre from his hand.
Soon the dwindling company, following the Isen, turned west and
rode through the Gap into the waste lands beyond, and then they
turned northwards, and passed over the borders of Dunland. The
Dunlendings ﬂed and hid themselves, for they were afraid of Elvish
folk, though few indeed ever came to their country; but the travellers
did not heed them, for they were still a great company and were well
provided with all that they needed; and they went on their way at
their leisure, setting up their tents when they would.
On the sixth day since their parting from the King they journeyed
through a wood climbing down from the hills at the feet of the Misty
Mountains that now marched on their right hand. As they came out

MANY PARTINGS

983

again into the open country at sundown they overtook an old man
leaning on a staff, and he was clothed in rags of grey or dirty white,
and at his heels went another beggar, slouching and whining.
‘Well Saruman!’ said Gandalf. ‘Where are you going?’
‘What is that to you?’ he answered. ‘Will you still order my goings,
and are you not content with my ruin?’
‘You know the answers,’ said Gandalf: ‘no and no. But in any
case the time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has
taken on the burden. If you had waited at Orthanc, you would have
seen him, and he would have shown you wisdom and mercy.’
‘Then all the more reason to have left sooner,’ said Saruman; ‘for
I desire neither of him. Indeed if you wish for an answer to your ﬁrst
question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.’
‘Then once more you are going the wrong way,’ said Gandalf,
‘and I see no hope in your journey. But will you scorn our help? For
we offer it to you.’
‘To me?’ said Saruman. ‘Nay, pray do not smile at me! I prefer
your frowns. And as for the Lady here, I do not trust her: she always
hated me, and schemed for your part. I do not doubt that she has
brought you this way to have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty.
Had I been warned of your pursuit, I would have denied you the
pleasure.’
‘Saruman,’ said Galadriel, ‘we have other errands and other cares
that seem to us more urgent than hunting for you. Say rather that
you are overtaken by good fortune; for now you have a last chance.’
‘If it be truly the last, I am glad,’ said Saruman; ‘for I shall be
spared the trouble of refusing it again. All my hopes are ruined, but
I would not share yours. If you have any.’
For a moment his eyes kindled. ‘Go!’ he said. ‘I did not spend
long study on these matters for naught. You have doomed yourselves,
and you know it. And it will afford me some comfort as I wander to
think that you pulled down your own house when you destroyed
mine. And now, what ship will bear you back across so wide a sea?’
he mocked. ‘It will be a grey ship, and full of ghosts.’ He laughed,
but his voice was cracked and hideous.
‘Get up, you idiot!’ he shouted to the other beggar, who had sat
down on the ground; and he struck him with his staff. ‘Turn about!
If these ﬁne folk are going our way, then we will take another. Get
on, or I’ll give you no crust for your supper!’
The beggar turned and slouched past whimpering: ‘Poor old
Grı́ma! Poor old Grı́ma! Always beaten and cursed. How I hate him!
I wish I could leave him!’
‘Then leave him!’ said Gandalf.
But Wormtongue only shot a glance of his bleared eyes full of

984

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

terror at Gandalf, and then shufﬂed quickly past behind Saruman.
As the wretched pair passed by the company they came to the hobbits,
and Saruman stopped and stared at them; but they looked at him
with pity.
‘So you have come to gloat too, have you, my urchins?’ he said.
‘You don’t care what a beggar lacks, do you? For you have all you
want, food and ﬁne clothes, and the best weed for your pipes. Oh
yes, I know! I know where it comes from. You would not give a
pipeful to a beggar, would you?’
‘I would, if I had any,’ said Frodo.
‘You can have what I have got left,’ said Merry, ‘if you will wait
a moment.’ He got down and searched in the bag at his saddle. Then
he handed to Saruman a leather pouch. ‘Take what there is,’ he said.
‘You are welcome to it; it came from the ﬂotsam of Isengard.’
‘Mine, mine, yes and dearly bought!’ cried Saruman, clutching at
the pouch. ‘This is only a repayment in token; for you took more,
I’ll be bound. Still, a beggar must be grateful, if a thief returns him
even a morsel of his own. Well, it will serve you right when you come
home, if you ﬁnd things less good in the Southfarthing than you
would like. Long may your land be short of leaf !’
‘Thank you!’ said Merry. ‘In that case I will have my pouch back,
which is not yours and has journeyed far with me. Wrap the weed
in a rag of your own.’
‘One thief deserves another,’ said Saruman, and turned his back
on Merry, and kicked Wormtongue, and went away towards the
wood.
‘Well, I like that!’ said Pippin. ‘Thief indeed! What of our claim
for waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?’
‘Ah!’ said Sam. ‘And bought he said. How, I wonder? And I didn’t
like the sound of what he said about the Southfarthing. It’s time we
got back.’
‘I’m sure it is,’ said Frodo. ‘But we can’t go any quicker, if we are
to see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell ﬁrst, whatever happens.’
‘Yes, I think you had better do that,’ said Gandalf. ‘But alas for
Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered
altogether. All the same, I am not sure that Treebeard is right: I
fancy he could do some mischief still in a small mean way.’
Next day they went on into northern Dunland, where no men
now dwelt, though it was a green and pleasant country. September
came in with golden days and silver nights, and they rode at ease
until they reached the Swanﬂeet river, and found the old ford, east of
the falls where it went down suddenly into the lowlands. Far to the west
in a haze lay the meres and eyots through which it wound its way to
the Greyﬂood: there countless swans housed in a land of reeds.

MANY PARTINGS

985

So they passed into Eregion, and at last a fair morning dawned,
shimmering above gleaming mists; and looking from their camp
on a low hill the travellers saw away in the east the Sun catching
three peaks that thrust up into the sky through ﬂoating clouds:
Caradhras, Celebdil, and Fanuidhol. They were near to the Gates of
Moria.
Here now for seven days they tarried, for the time was at hand
for another parting which they were loth to make. Soon Celeborn
and Galadriel and their folk would turn eastward, and so pass by the
Redhorn Gate and down the Dimrill Stair to the Silverlode and to
their own country. They had journeyed thus far by the west-ways,
for they had much to speak of with Elrond and with Gandalf, and
here they lingered still in converse with their friends. Often long after
the hobbits were wrapped in sleep they would sit together under the
stars, recalling the ages that were gone and all their joys and labours
in the world, or holding council, concerning the days to come. If any
wanderer had chanced to pass, little would he have seen or heard,
and it would have seemed to him only that he saw grey ﬁgures, carved
in stone, memorials of forgotten things now lost in unpeopled lands.
For they did not move or speak with mouth, looking from mind to
mind; and only their shining eyes stirred and kindled as their thoughts
went to and fro.
But at length all was said, and they parted again for a while, until
it was time for the Three Rings to pass away. Quickly fading into the
stones and the shadows the grey-cloaked people of Lórien rode
towards the mountains; and those who were going to Rivendell sat
on the hill and watched, until there came out of the gathering mist
a ﬂash; and then they saw no more. Frodo knew that Galadriel had
held aloft her ring in token of farewell.
Sam turned away and sighed: ‘I wish I was going back to Lórien!’
At last one evening they came over the high moors, suddenly as
to travellers it always seemed, to the brink of the deep valley of
Rivendell and saw far below the lamps shining in Elrond’s house.
And they went down and crossed the bridge and came to the doors,
and all the house was ﬁlled with light and song for joy at Elrond’s
homecoming.
First of all, before they had eaten or washed or even shed their
cloaks, the hobbits went in search of Bilbo. They found him all alone
in his little room. It was littered with papers and pens and pencils;
but Bilbo was sitting in a chair before a small bright ﬁre. He looked
very old, but peaceful, and sleepy.
He opened his eyes and looked up as they came in. ‘Hullo, hullo!’
he said. ‘So you’ve come back? And tomorrow’s my birthday,
too. How clever of you! Do you know, I shall be one hundred and

986

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

twenty-nine? And in one year more, if I am spared, I shall equal the
Old Took. I should like to beat him; but we shall see.’
After the celebration of Bilbo’s birthday the four hobbits stayed
in Rivendell for some days, and they sat much with their old friend,
who spent most of his time now in his room, except at meals. For
these he was still very punctual as a rule, and he seldom failed to
wake up in time for them. Sitting round the ﬁre they told him in
turn all that they could remember of their journeys and adventures.
At ﬁrst he pretended to take some notes; but he often fell asleep;
and when he woke he would say: ‘How splendid! How wonderful!
But where were we?’ Then they went on with the story from the
point where he had begun to nod.
The only part that seemed really to rouse him and hold his attention was the account of the crowning and marriage of Aragorn. ‘I
was invited to the wedding, of course,’ he said. ‘And I have waited
for it long enough. But somehow, when it came to it, I found I had
so much to do here; and packing is such a bother.’
When nearly a fortnight had passed Frodo looked out of his
window and saw that there had been a frost in the night, and the
cobwebs were like white nets. Then suddenly he knew that he must
go, and say good-bye to Bilbo. The weather was still calm and fair,
after one of the most lovely summers that people could remember;
but October had come, and it must break soon and begin to rain
and blow again. And there was still a very long way to go. Yet it was
not really the thought of the weather that stirred him. He had a
feeling that it was time he went back to the Shire. Sam shared it.
Only the night before he had said:
‘Well, Mr. Frodo, we’ve been far and seen a deal, and yet I don’t
think we’ve found a better place than this. There’s something of
everything here, if you understand me: the Shire and the Golden
Wood and Gondor and kings’ houses and inns and meadows and
mountains all mixed. And yet, somehow, I feel we ought to be going
soon. I’m worried about my gaffer, to tell you the truth.’
‘Yes, something of everything, Sam, except the Sea,’ Frodo had
answered; and he repeated it now to himself: ‘Except the Sea.’
That day Frodo spoke to Elrond, and it was agreed that they
should leave the next morning. To their delight Gandalf said: ‘I think
I shall come too. At least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.’
In the evening they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. ‘Well, if you
must go, you must,’ he said. ‘I am sorry. I shall miss you. It is nice
just to know that you are about the place. But I am getting very
sleepy.’ Then he gave Frodo his mithril-coat and Sting, forgetting

MANY PARTINGS

987

that he had already done so; and he gave him also three books of
lore that he had made at various times, written in his spidery hand,
and labelled on their red backs: Translations from the Elvish, by B.B.
To Sam he gave a little bag of gold. ‘Almost the last drop of the
Smaug vintage,’ he said. ‘May come in useful, if you think of getting
married, Sam.’ Sam blushed.
‘I have nothing much to give to you young fellows,’ he said to
Merry and Pippin, ‘except good advice.’ And when he had given
them a fair sample of this, he added a last item in Shire-fashion:
‘Don’t let your heads get too big for your hats! But if you don’t ﬁnish
growing up soon, you are going to ﬁnd hats and clothes expensive.’
‘But if you want to beat the Old Took,’ said Pippin, ‘I don’t see
why we shouldn’t try and beat the Bullroarer.’
Bilbo laughed, and he produced out of a pocket two beautiful
pipes with pearl mouth-pieces and bound with ﬁne-wrought silver.
‘Think of me when you smoke them!’ he said. ‘The Elves made them
for me, but I don’t smoke now.’ And then suddenly he nodded and
went to sleep for a little; and when he woke up again he said: ‘Now
where were we? Yes, of course, giving presents. Which reminds me:
what’s become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?’
‘I have lost it, Bilbo dear,’ said Frodo. ‘I got rid of it, you know.’
‘What a pity!’ said Bilbo. ‘I should have liked to see it again. But
no, how silly of me! That’s what you went for, wasn’t it: to get rid
of it? But it is all so confusing, for such a lot of other things seem to
have got mixed up with it: Aragorn’s affairs, and the White Council,
and Gondor, and the Horsemen, and Southrons, and oliphaunts –
did you really see one, Sam? – and caves and towers and golden
trees, and goodness knows what besides.
‘I evidently came back by much too straight a road from my trip.
I think Gandalf might have shown me round a bit. But then the
auction would have been over before I got back, and I should have
had even more trouble than I did. Anyway it’s too late now; and
really I think it’s much more comfortable to sit here and hear about
it all. The ﬁre’s very cosy here, and the food’s very good, and there
are Elves when you want them. What more could one want?
The Road goes ever on and on
Out from the door where it began.
Now far ahead the Road has gone,
Let others follow it who can!
Let them a journey new begin,
But I at last with weary feet
Will turn towards the lighted inn,
My evening-rest and sleep to meet.’

988

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

And as Bilbo murmured the last words his head dropped on his
chest and he slept soundly.
The evening deepened in the room, and the ﬁrelight burned
brighter; and they looked at Bilbo as he slept and saw that his face
was smiling. For some time they sat in silence; and then Sam looking
round at the room and the shadows ﬂickering on the walls, said softly:
‘I don’t think, Mr. Frodo, that he’s done much writing while we’ve
been away. He won’t ever write our story now.’
At that Bilbo opened an eye, almost as if he had heard. Then he
roused himself. ‘You see, I am getting so sleepy,’ he said. ‘And when
I have time to write, I only really like writing poetry. I wonder, Frodo
my dear fellow, if you would very much mind tidying things up a bit
before you go? Collect all my notes and papers, and my diary too,
and take them with you, if you will. You see, I haven’t much time
for the selection and the arrangement and all that. Get Sam to help,
and when you’ve knocked things into shape, come back, and I’ll run
over it. I won’t be too critical.’
‘Of course I’ll do it!’ said Frodo. ‘And of course I’ll come back
soon: it won’t be dangerous any more. There is a real king now, and
he will soon put the roads in order.’
‘Thank you, my dear fellow!’ said Bilbo. ‘That really is a very great
relief to my mind.’ And with that he fell asleep again.
The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave of Bilbo in his
room, for it was cold out of doors; and then they said farewell to
Elrond and all his household.
As Frodo stood upon the threshold, Elrond wished him a fair
journey, and blessed him, and he said:
‘I think, Frodo, that maybe you will not need to come back, unless
you come very soon. For about this time of the year, when the leaves
are gold before they fall, look for Bilbo in the woods of the Shire. I
shall be with him.’
These words no one else heard, and Frodo kept them to himself.

Chapter 7
H O M E WA R D B O U N D
At last the hobbits had their faces turned towards home. They were
eager now to see the Shire again; but at ﬁrst they rode only slowly,
for Frodo had been ill at ease. When they came to the Ford of
Bruinen, he had halted, and seemed loth to ride into the stream; and
they noted that for a while his eyes appeared not to see them or
things about him. All that day he was silent. It was the sixth of
October.
‘Are you in pain, Frodo?’ said Gandalf quietly as he rode by
Frodo’s side.
‘Well, yes I am,’ said Frodo. ‘It is my shoulder. The wound aches,
and the memory of darkness is heavy on me. It was a year ago today.’
‘Alas! there are some wounds that cannot be wholly cured,’ said
Gandalf.
‘I fear it may be so with mine,’ said Frodo. ‘There is no real going
back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same;
for I shall not be the same. I am wounded with knife, sting, and
tooth, and a long burden. Where shall I ﬁnd rest?’
Gandalf did not answer.
By the end of the next day the pain and unease had passed, and
Frodo was merry again, as merry as if he did not remember the
blackness of the day before. After that the journey went well, and
the days went quickly by; for they rode at leisure, and often they
lingered in the fair woodlands where the leaves were red and yellow
in the autumn sun. At length they came to Weathertop; and it was
then drawing towards evening and the shadow of the hill lay dark on
the road. Then Frodo begged them to hasten, and he would not look
towards the hill, but rode through its shadow with head bowed and
cloak drawn close about him. That night the weather changed, and a
wind came from the West laden with rain, and it blew loud and chill,
and the yellow leaves whirled like birds in the air. When they came
to the Chetwood already the boughs were almost bare, and a great
curtain of rain veiled Bree-hill from their sight.
So it was that near the end of a wild and wet evening in the last
days of October the ﬁve travellers rode up the climbing road and
came to the South-gate of Bree. It was locked fast; and the rain blew
in their faces, and in the darkening sky low clouds went hurrying by,
and their hearts sank a little, for they had expected more welcome.

990

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

When they had called many times, at last the Gate-keeper came
out, and they saw that he carried a great cudgel. He looked at them
with fear and suspicion; but when he saw that Gandalf was there,
and that his companions were hobbits, in spite of their strange gear,
then he brightened and wished them welcome.
‘Come in!’ he said, unlocking the gate. ‘We won’t stay for news
out here in the cold and the wet, a rufﬁanly evening. But old Barley
will no doubt give you a welcome at The Pony, and there you’ll hear
all there is to hear.’
‘And there you’ll hear later all that we say, and more,’ laughed
Gandalf. ‘How is Harry?’
The Gate-keeper scowled. ‘Gone,’ he said. ‘But you’d best ask
Barliman. Good evening!’
‘Good evening to you!’ they said, and passed through; and then
they noticed that behind the hedge at the road-side a long low hut
had been built, and a number of men had come out and were staring
at them over the fence. When they came to Bill Ferny’s house they
saw that the hedge there was tattered and unkempt, and the windows
were all boarded up.
‘Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?’ said Pippin.
‘I’m not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin,’ said Sam. ‘But I’d like to know
what became of that poor pony. He’s been on my mind many a time,
and the wolves howling and all.’
At last they came to The Prancing Pony, and that at least looked
outwardly unchanged; and there were lights behind the red curtains
in the lower windows. They rang the bell, and Nob came to the door,
and opened it a crack and peeped through; and when he saw them
standing under the lamp he gave a cry of surprise.
‘Mr. Butterbur! Master!’ he shouted. ‘They’ve come back!’
‘Oh have they? I’ll learn them,’ came Butterbur’s voice, and out
he came with a rush, and he had a club in his hand. But when he
saw who they were he stopped short, and the black scowl on his face
changed to wonder and delight.
‘Nob, you woolly-pated ninny!’ he cried. ‘Can’t you give old
friends their names? You shouldn’t go scaring me like that, with times
as they are. Well, well! And where have you come from? I never
expected to see any of you folk again, and that’s a fact: going off into
the Wild with that Strider, and all those Black Men about. But I’m
right glad to see you, and none more than Gandalf. Come in! Come
in! The same rooms as before? They’re free. Indeed most rooms are
empty these days, as I’ll not hide from you, for you’ll ﬁnd it out soon
enough. And I’ll see what can be done about supper, as soon as may
be; but I’m short-handed at present. Hey, Nob you slowcoach! Tell

H O M E WA R D B O U N D

991

Bob! Ah, but there I’m forgetting, Bob’s gone: goes home to his folk
at nightfall now. Well, take the guests’ ponies to the stables, Nob!
And you’ll be taking your horse to his stable yourself, Gandalf, I
don’t doubt. A ﬁne beast, as I said when I ﬁrst set eyes on him. Well,
come in! Make yourselves at home!’
Mr. Butterbur had at any rate not changed his manner of talking,
and still seemed to live in his old breathless bustle. And yet there
was hardly anybody about, and all was quiet; from the Common
Room there came a low murmur of no more than two or three voices.
And seen closer in the light of two candles that he lit and carried
before them the landlord’s face looked rather wrinkled and careworn.
He led them down the passage to the parlour that they had used
on that strange night more than a year ago; and they followed him,
a little disquieted, for it seemed plain to them that old Barliman was
putting a brave face on some trouble. Things were not what they had
been. But they said nothing, and waited.
As they expected Mr. Butterbur came to the parlour after supper
to see if all had been to their liking. As indeed it had: no change for
the worse had yet come upon the beer or the victuals at The Pony,
at any rate. ‘Now I won’t make so bold as to suggest you should
come to the Common Room tonight,’ said Butterbur. ‘You’ll be
tired; and there isn’t many folk there this evening, anyway. But if
you could spare me half an hour before you go to your beds, I would
dearly like to have some talk with you, quiet-like by ourselves.’
‘That is just what we should like, too,’ said Gandalf. ‘We are not
tired. We have been taking things easy. We were wet, cold and
hungry, but all that you have cured. Come, sit down! And if you
have any pipe-weed, we’ll bless you.’
‘Well, if you’d called for anything else, I’d have been happier,’
said Butterbur. ‘That’s just a thing that we’re short of, seeing how
we’ve only got what we grow ourselves, and that’s not enough.
There’s none to be had from the Shire these days. But I’ll do what
I can.’
When he came back he brought them enough to last them for a
day or two, a wad of uncut leaf. ‘Southlinch,’ he said, ‘and the best
we have; but not the match of Southfarthing, as I’ve always said,
though I’m all for Bree in most matters, begging your pardon.’
They put him in a large chair by the wood-ﬁre, and Gandalf sat
on the other side of the hearth, and the hobbits in low chairs between
them; and then they talked for many times half an hour, and
exchanged all such news as Mr. Butterbur wished to hear or give.
Most of the things which they had to tell were a mere wonder and
bewilderment to their host, and far beyond his vision; and they
brought forth few comments other than: ‘You don’t say,’ often

992

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

repeated in deﬁance of the evidence of Mr. Butterbur’s own ears.
‘You don’t say, Mr. Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill? I’m getting so
mixed up. You don’t say, Master Gandalf ! Well I never! Who’d have
thought it in our times!’
But he did say much on his own account. Things were far from
well, he would say. Business was not even fair, it was downright bad.
‘No one comes nigh Bree now from Outside,’ he said. ‘And the inside
folks, they stay at home mostly and keep their doors barred. It all
comes of those newcomers and gangrels that began coming up the
Greenway last year, as you may remember; but more came later.
Some were just poor bodies running away from trouble; but most
were bad men, full o’ thievery and mischief. And there was trouble
right here in Bree, bad trouble. Why, we had a real set-to, and there
were some folk killed, killed dead! If you’ll believe me.’
‘I will indeed,’ said Gandalf. ‘How many?’
‘Three and two,’ said Butterbur, referring to the big folk and the
little. ‘There was poor Mat Heathertoes, and Rowlie Appledore, and
little Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill; and Willie Banks from upaway, and one of the Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and
they’re missed. And Harry Goatleaf that used to be on the West-gate,
and that Bill Ferny, they came in on the strangers’ side, and they’ve
gone off with them; and it’s my belief they let them in. On the night
of the ﬁght, I mean. And that was after we showed them the gates
and pushed them out: before the year’s end, that was; and the ﬁght
was early in the New Year, after the heavy snow we had.
‘And now they’re gone for robbers and live outside, hiding in the
woods beyond Archet, and out in the wilds north-away. It’s like a
bit of the bad old times tales tell of, I say. It isn’t safe on the road
and nobody goes far, and folk lock up early. We have to keep watchers
all round the fence and put a lot of men on the gates at nights.’
‘Well, no one troubled us,’ said Pippin, ‘and we came along slowly,
and kept no watch. We thought we’d left all trouble behind us.’
‘Ah, that you haven’t, Master, more’s the pity,’ said Butterbur.
‘But it’s no wonder they left you alone. They wouldn’t go for armed
folk, with swords and helmets and shields and all. Make them think
twice, that would. And I must say it put me aback a bit when I saw
you.’
Then the hobbits suddenly realized that people had looked at them
with amazement not out of surprise at their return so much as in
wonder at their gear. They themselves had become so used to warfare
and to riding in well-arrayed companies that they had quite forgotten
that the bright mail peeping from under their cloaks, and the helms
of Gondor and the Mark, and the fair devices on their shields, would
seem outlandish in their own country. And Gandalf, too, was now

H O M E WA R D B O U N D

993

riding on his tall grey horse, all clad in white with a great mantle of
blue and silver over all, and the long sword Glamdring at his side.
Gandalf laughed. ‘Well, well,’ he said, ‘if they are afraid of just
ﬁve of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But at
any rate they will give you peace at night while we stay.’
‘How long will that be?’ said Butterbur. ‘I’ll not deny we should
be glad to have you about for a bit. You see, we’re not used to such
troubles; and the Rangers have all gone away, folk tell me. I don’t
think we’ve rightly understood till now what they did for us. For
there’s been worse than robbers about. Wolves were howling round
the fences last winter. And there’s dark shapes in the woods, dreadful
things that it makes the blood run cold to think of. It’s been very
disturbing, if you understand me.’
‘I expect it has,’ said Gandalf. ‘Nearly all lands have been disturbed
these days, very disturbed. But cheer up, Barliman! You have been
on the edge of very great troubles, and I am only glad to hear that
you have not been deeper in. But better times are coming. Maybe,
better than any you remember. The Rangers have returned. We came
back with them. And there is a king again, Barliman. He will soon
be turning his mind this way.
‘Then the Greenway will be opened again, and his messengers will
come north, and there will be comings and goings, and the evil things
will be driven out of the waste-lands. Indeed the waste in time will
be waste no longer, and there will be people and ﬁelds where once
there was wilderness.’
Mr. Butterbur shook his head. ‘If there’s a few decent respectable
folk on the roads, that won’t do no harm,’ he said. ‘But we don’t
want no more rabble and rufﬁans. And we don’t want no outsiders
at Bree, nor near Bree at all. We want to be let alone. I don’t want
a whole crowd o’ strangers camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.’
‘You will be let alone, Barliman,’ said Gandalf. ‘There is room
enough for realms between Isen and Greyﬂood, or along the shorelands south of the Brandywine, without anyone living within many
days’ ride of Bree. And many folk used to dwell away north, a hundred
miles or more from here, at the far end of the Greenway: on the
North Downs or by Lake Evendim.’
‘Up away by Deadmen’s Dike?’ said Butterbur, looking even more
dubious. ‘That’s haunted land, they say. None but a robber would
go there.’
‘The Rangers go there,’ said Gandalf. ‘Deadmen’s Dike, you say.
So it has been called for long years; but its right name, Barliman, is
Fornost Erain, Norbury of the Kings. And the King will come there
again one day; and then you’ll have some fair folk riding through.’

994

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Well, that sounds more hopeful, I’ll allow,’ said Butterbur. ‘And
it will be good for business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.’
‘He will,’ said Gandalf. ‘He knows it and loves it.’
‘Does he now?’ said Butterbur looking puzzled. ‘Though I’m sure
I don’t know why he should, sitting in his big chair up in his great
castle, hundreds of miles away. And drinking wine out of a golden
cup, I shouldn’t wonder. What’s The Pony to him, or mugs o’ beer?
Not but what my beer’s good, Gandalf. It’s been uncommon good,
since you came in the autumn of last year and put a good word on
it. And that’s been a comfort in trouble, I will say.’
‘Ah!’ said Sam. ‘But he says your beer is always good.’
‘He says?’
‘Of course he does. He’s Strider. The chief of the Rangers. Haven’t
you got that into your head yet?’
It went in at last, and Butterbur’s face was a study in wonder. The
eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and
he gasped. ‘Strider!’ he exclaimed when he got back his breath. ‘Him
with a crown and all and a golden cup! Well, what are we coming
to?’
‘Better times, for Bree at any rate,’ said Gandalf.
‘I hope so, I’m sure,’ said Butterbur. ‘Well, this has been the nicest
chat I’ve had in a month of Mondays. And I’ll not deny that I’ll sleep
easier tonight and with a lighter heart. You’ve given me a powerful
lot to think over, but I’ll put that off until tomorrow. I’m for bed,
and I’ve no doubt you’ll be glad of your beds too. Hey, Nob!’ he
called, going to the door. ‘Nob, you slowcoach!’
‘Nob!’ he said to himself, slapping his forehead. ‘Now what does
that remind me of ?’
‘Not another letter you’ve forgotten, I hope, Mr. Butterbur?’ said
Merry.
‘Now, now, Mr. Brandybuck, don’t go reminding me of that! But
there, you’ve broken my thought. Now where was I? Nob, stables,
ah! that was it. I’ve something that belongs to you. If you recollect
Bill Ferny and the horsethieving: his pony as you bought, well, it’s
here. Come back all of itself, it did. But where it had been to you
know better than me. It was as shaggy as an old dog and as lean as
a clothes-rail, but it was alive. Nob’s looked after it.’
‘What! My Bill?’ cried Sam. ‘Well, I was born lucky, whatever my
gaffer may say. There’s another wish come true! Where is he?’ Sam
would not go to bed until he had visited Bill in his stable.
The travellers stayed in Bree all the next day, and Mr. Butterbur
could not complain of his business next evening at any rate. Curiosity
overcame all fears, and his house was crowded. For a while out of

H O M E WA R D B O U N D

995

politeness the hobbits visited the Common Room in the evening and
answered a good many questions. Bree memories being retentive,
Frodo was asked many times if he had written his book.
‘Not yet,’ he answered. ‘I am going home now to put my notes
in order.’ He promised to deal with the amazing events at Bree, and
so give a bit of interest to a book that appeared likely to treat mostly
of the remote and less important affairs ‘away south’.
Then one of the younger folk called for a song. But at that a
hush fell, and he was frowned down, and the call was not repeated.
Evidently there was no wish for any uncanny events in the Common
Room again.
No trouble by day, nor any sound by night, disturbed the peace
of Bree while the travellers remained there; but the next morning
they got up early, for as the weather was still rainy they wished to
reach the Shire before night, and it was a long ride. The Bree folk
were all out to see them off, and were in merrier mood than they
had been for a year; and those who had not seen the strangers in all
their gear before gaped with wonder at them: at Gandalf with his
white beard, and the light that seemed to gleam from him, as if his
blue mantle was only a cloud over sunshine; and at the four hobbits
like riders upon errantry out of almost forgotten tales. Even those
who had laughed at all the talk about the King began to think there
might be some truth in it.
‘Well, good luck on your road, and good luck to your homecoming!’ said Mr. Butterbur. ‘I should have warned you before that all’s
not well in the Shire neither, if what we hear is true. Funny goings
on, they say. But one thing drives out another, and I was full of my
own troubles. But if I may be so bold, you’ve come back changed
from your travels, and you look now like folk as can deal with troubles
out of hand. I don’t doubt you’ll soon set all to rights. Good luck to
you! And the oftener you come back the better I’ll be pleased.’
They wished him farewell and rode away, and passed through the
West-gate and on towards the Shire. Bill the pony was with them,
and as before he had a good deal of baggage, but he trotted along
beside Sam and seemed well content.
‘I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,’ said Frodo.
‘I can guess some of it,’ said Sam gloomily. ‘What I saw in the
Mirror: trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the
Row. I ought to have hurried back quicker.’
‘And something’s wrong with the Southfarthing evidently,’ said
Merry. ‘There’s a general shortage of pipe-weed.’
‘Whatever it is,’ said Pippin, ‘Lotho will be at the bottom of it:
you can be sure of that.’

996

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Deep in, but not at the bottom,’ said Gandalf. ‘You have forgotten
Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor
did.’
‘Well, we’ve got you with us,’ said Merry, ‘so things will soon be
cleared up.’
‘I am with you at present,’ said Gandalf, ‘but soon I shall not be.
I am not coming to the Shire. You must settle its affairs yourselves;
that is what you have been trained for. Do you not yet understand?
My time is over: it is no longer my task to set things to rights, nor
to help folk to do so. And as for you, my dear friends, you will need
no help. You are grown up now. Grown indeed very high; among
the great you are, and I have no longer any fear at all for any of you.
‘But if you would know, I am turning aside soon. I am going to
have a long talk with Bombadil: such a talk as I have not had in all
my time. He is a moss-gatherer, and I have been a stone doomed to
rolling. But my rolling days are ending, and now we shall have much
to say to one another.’
In a little while they came to the point on the East Road where
they had taken leave of Bombadil; and they hoped and half expected
to see him standing there to greet them as they went by. But there
was no sign of him; and there was a grey mist on the Barrow-downs
southwards, and a deep veil over the Old Forest far away.
They halted and Frodo looked south wistfully. ‘I should dearly
like to see the old fellow again,’ he said. ‘I wonder how he is getting
on?’
‘As well as ever, you may be sure,’ said Gandalf. ‘Quite untroubled;
and I should guess, not much interested in anything that we have
done or seen, unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents. There may be
a time later for you to go and see him. But if I were you, I should
press on now for home, or you will not come to the Brandywine
Bridge before the gates are locked.’
‘But there aren’t any gates,’ said Merry, ‘not on the Road; you
know that quite well. There’s the Buckland Gate, of course; but
they’ll let me through that at any time.’
‘There weren’t any gates, you mean,’ said Gandalf. ‘I think you
will ﬁnd some now. And you might have more trouble even at the
Buckland Gate than you think. But you’ll manage all right. Good-bye,
dear friends! Not for the last time, not yet. Good-bye!’
He turned Shadowfax off the Road, and the great horse leaped
the green dike that here ran beside it; and then at a cry from Gandalf
he was gone, racing towards the Barrow-downs like a wind from the
North.
*
*
*

H O M E WA R D B O U N D

997

‘Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together,’
said Merry. ‘We have left all the rest behind, one after another. It
seems almost like a dream that has slowly faded.’
‘Not to me,’ said Frodo. ‘To me it feels more like falling asleep
again.’

Chapter 8
THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE
It was after nightfall when, wet and tired, the travellers came at last
to the Brandywine, and they found the way barred. At either end of
the Bridge there was a great spiked gate; and on the further side
of the river they could see that some new houses had been built:
two-storeyed with narrow straight-sided windows, bare and dimly lit,
all very gloomy and un-Shirelike.
They hammered on the outer gate and called, but there was at
ﬁrst no answer; and then to their surprise someone blew a horn, and
the lights in the windows went out. A voice shouted in the dark:
‘Who’s that? Be off ! You can’t come in. Can’t you read the notice:
No admittance between sundown and sunrise?’
‘Of course we can’t read the notice in the dark,’ Sam shouted
back. ‘And if hobbits of the Shire are to be kept out in the wet on a
night like this, I’ll tear down your notice when I ﬁnd it.’
At that a window slammed, and a crowd of hobbits with lanterns
poured out of the house on the left. They opened the further gate,
and some came over the bridge. When they saw the travellers they
seemed frightened.
‘Come along!’ said Merry, recognizing one of the hobbits. ‘If you
don’t know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I should like to know what all this is about, and what
a Bucklander like you is doing here. You used to be on the Hay
Gate.’
‘Bless me! It’s Master Merry, to be sure, and all dressed up for
ﬁghting!’ said old Hob. ‘Why, they said you was dead! Lost in the
Old Forest by all accounts. I’m pleased to see you alive after all!’
‘Then stop gaping at me through the bars, and open the gate!’
said Merry.
‘I’m sorry, Master Merry, but we have orders.’
‘Whose orders?’
‘The Chief ’s up at Bag End.’
‘Chief ? Chief ? Do you mean Mr. Lotho?’ said Frodo.
‘I suppose so, Mr. Baggins; but we have to say just ‘‘the Chief ’’
nowadays.’
‘Do you indeed!’ said Frodo. ‘Well, I am glad he has dropped the
Baggins at any rate. But it is evidently high time that the family dealt
with him and put him in his place.’
A hush fell on the hobbits beyond the gate. ‘It won’t do no good

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

999

talking that way,’ said one. ‘He’ll get to hear of it. And if you make
so much noise, you’ll wake the Chief ’s Big Man.’
‘We shall wake him up in a way that will surprise him,’ said Merry.
‘If you mean that your precious Chief has been hiring rufﬁans out
of the wild, then we’ve not come back too soon.’ He sprang from his
pony, and seeing the notice in the light of the lanterns, he tore
it down and threw it over the gate. The hobbits backed away and
made no move to open it. ‘Come on, Pippin!’ said Merry. ‘Two is
enough.’
Merry and Pippin climbed the gate, and the hobbits ﬂed. Another
horn sounded. Out of the bigger house on the right a large heavy
ﬁgure appeared against a light in the doorway.
‘What’s all this,’ he snarled as he came forward. ‘Gate-breaking?
You clear out, or I’ll break your ﬁlthy little necks!’ Then he stopped,
for he had caught the gleam of swords.
‘Bill Ferny,’ said Merry, ‘if you don’t open that gate in ten seconds,
you’ll regret it. I shall set steel to you, if you don’t obey. And when
you have opened the gates you will go through them and never return.
You are a rufﬁan and a highway-robber.’
Bill Ferny ﬂinched and shufﬂed to the gate and unlocked it. ‘Give
me the key!’ said Merry. But the rufﬁan ﬂung it at his head and then
darted out into the darkness. As he passed the ponies one of them
let ﬂy with his heels and just caught him as he ran. He went off with
a yelp into the night and was never heard of again.
‘Neat work, Bill,’ said Sam, meaning the pony.
‘So much for your Big Man,’ said Merry. ‘We’ll see the Chief
later. In the meantime we want a lodging for the night, and as you
seem to have pulled down the Bridge Inn and built this dismal place
instead, you’ll have to put us up.’
‘I am sorry, Mr. Merry,’ said Hob, ‘but it isn’t allowed.’
‘What isn’t allowed?’
‘Taking in folk off-hand like, and eating extra food, and all that,’
said Hob.
‘What’s the matter with the place?’ said Merry. ‘Has it been a bad
year, or what? I thought it had been a ﬁne summer and harvest.’
‘Well no, the year’s been good enough,’ said Hob. ‘We grows a
lot of food, but we don’t rightly know what becomes of it. It’s all
these ‘‘gatherers’’ and ‘‘sharers’’, I reckon, going round counting and
measuring and taking off to storage. They do more gathering than
sharing, and we never see most of the stuff again.’
‘Oh come!’ said Pippin yawning. ‘This is all too tiresome for me
tonight. We’ve got food in our bags. Just give us a room to lie down
in. It’ll be better than many places I have seen.’
*
*
*

1000

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The hobbits at the gate still seemed ill at ease, evidently some rule
or other was being broken; but there was no gainsaying four such
masterful travellers, all armed, and two of them uncommonly large and
strong-looking. Frodo ordered the gates to be locked again. There was
some sense at any rate in keeping a guard, while rufﬁans were still
about. Then the four companions went into the hobbit guard-house
and made themselves as comfortable as they could. It was a bare and
ugly place, with a mean little grate that would not allow a good ﬁre.
In the upper rooms were little rows of hard beds, and on every wall
there was a notice and a list of Rules. Pippin tore them down. There
was no beer and very little food, but with what the travellers brought
and shared out they all made a fair meal; and Pippin broke Rule 4
by putting most of next day’s allowance of wood on the ﬁre.
‘Well now, what about a smoke, while you tell us what has been
happening in the Shire?’ he said.
‘There isn’t no pipe-weed now,’ said Hob; ‘at least only for the
Chief ’s men. All the stocks seem to have gone. We do hear that
waggon-loads of it went away down the old road out of the Southfarthing, over Sarn Ford way. That would be the end o’ last year,
after you left. But it had been going away quietly before that, in a
small way. That Lotho——’
‘Now you shut up, Hob Hayward!’ cried several of the others.
‘You know talk o’ that sort isn’t allowed. The Chief will hear of it,
and we’ll all be in trouble.’
‘He wouldn’t hear naught, if some of you here weren’t sneaks,’
rejoined Hob hotly.
‘All right, all right!’ said Sam. ‘That’s quite enough. I don’t want
to hear no more. No welcome, no beer, no smoke, and a lot of rules
and orc-talk instead. I hoped to have a rest, but I can see there’s
work and trouble ahead. Let’s sleep and forget it till morning!’
The new ‘Chief ’ evidently had means of getting news. It was a
good forty miles from the Bridge to Bag End, but someone made
the journey in a hurry. So Frodo and his friends soon discovered.
They had not made any deﬁnite plans, but had vaguely thought
of going down to Crickhollow together ﬁrst, and resting there a bit.
But now, seeing what things were like, they decided to go straight to
Hobbiton. So the next day they set out along the Road and jogged
along steadily. The wind had dropped but the sky was grey. The land
looked rather sad and forlorn; but it was after all the ﬁrst of November
and the fag-end of autumn. Still there seemed an unusual amount
of burning going on, and smoke rose from many points round about.
A great cloud of it was going up far away in the direction of the
Woody End.

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1001

As evening fell they were drawing near to Frogmorton, a village
right on the Road, about twenty-two miles from the Bridge. There
they meant to stay the night; The Floating Log at Frogmorton was a
good inn. But as they came to the east end of the village they met
a barrier with a large board saying no road; and behind it stood a
large band of Shirriffs with staves in their hands and feathers in their
caps, looking both important and rather scared.
‘What’s all this?’ said Frodo, feeling inclined to laugh.
‘This is what it is, Mr. Baggins,’ said the leader of the Shirriffs, a
two-feather hobbit: ‘You’re arrested for Gate-breaking, and Tearing
up of Rules, and Assaulting Gate-keepers, and Trespassing, and
Sleeping in Shire-buildings without Leave, and Bribing Guards with
Food.’
‘And what else?’ said Frodo.
‘That’ll do to go on with,’ said the Shirriff-leader.
‘I can add some more, if you’d like it,’ said Sam. ‘Calling your
Chief Names, Wishing to punch his Pimply Face, and Thinking you
Shirriffs look a lot of Tom-fools.’
‘There now, Mister, that’ll do. It’s the Chief ’s orders that you’re
to come along quiet. We’re going to take you to Bywater and hand
you over to the Chief ’s Men; and when he deals with your case you
can have your say. But if you don’t want to stay in the Lockholes
any longer than you need, I should cut the say short, if I was you.’
To the discomﬁture of the Shirriffs Frodo and his companions all
roared with laughter. ‘Don’t be absurd!’ said Frodo. ‘I am going
where I please, and in my own time. I happen to be going to Bag
End on business, but if you insist on going too, well that is your
affair.’
‘Very well, Mr. Baggins,’ said the leader, pushing the barrier aside.
‘But don’t forget I’ve arrested you.’
‘I won’t,’ said Frodo. ‘Never. But I may forgive you. Now I am
not going any further today, so if you’ll kindly escort me to The
Floating Log, I’ll be obliged.’
‘I can’t do that, Mr. Baggins. The inn’s closed. There’s a Shirriffhouse at the far end of the village. I’ll take you there.’
‘All right,’ said Frodo. ‘Go on and we’ll follow.’
Sam had been looking the Shirriffs up and down and had spotted
one that he knew. ‘Hey, come here Robin Smallburrow!’ he called.
‘I want a word with you.’
With a sheepish glance at his leader, who looked wrathful but did
not dare to interfere, Shirriff Smallburrow fell back and walked beside
Sam, who got down off his pony.
‘Look here, Cock-robin!’ said Sam. ‘You’re Hobbiton-bred and

1002

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

ought to have more sense, coming a-waylaying Mr. Frodo and all.
And what’s all this about the inn being closed?’
‘They’re all closed,’ said Robin. ‘The Chief doesn’t hold with beer.
Leastways that is how it started. But now I reckon it’s his Men that
has it all. And he doesn’t hold with folk moving about; so if they will
or they must, then they has to go to the Shirriff-house and explain
their business.’
‘You ought to be ashamed of yourself having anything to do with
such nonsense,’ said Sam. ‘You used to like the inside of an inn
better than the outside yourself. You were always popping in, on
duty or off.’
‘And so I would be still, Sam, if I could. But don’t be hard on
me. What can I do? You know how I went for a Shirriff seven years
ago, before any of this began. Gave me a chance of walking round
the country and seeing folk, and hearing the news, and knowing
where the good beer was. But now it’s different.’
‘But you can give it up, stop Shirrifﬁng, if it has stopped being a
respectable job,’ said Sam.
‘We’re not allowed to,’ said Robin.
‘If I hear not allowed much oftener,’ said Sam, ‘I’m going to get
angry.’
‘Can’t say as I’d be sorry to see it,’ said Robin lowering his voice.
‘If we all got angry together something might be done. But it’s these
Men, Sam, the Chief ’s Men. He sends them round everywhere, and
if any of us small folk stand up for our rights, they drag him off to
the Lockholes. They took old Flourdumpling, old Will Whitfoot the
Mayor, ﬁrst, and they’ve taken a lot more. Lately it’s been getting
worse. Often they beat ’em now.’
‘Then why do you do their work for them?’ said Sam angrily.
‘Who sent you to Frogmorton?’
‘No one did. We stay here in the big Shirriff-house. We’re the
First Eastfarthing Troop now. There’s hundreds of Shirriffs all told,
and they want more, with all these new rules. Most of them are in
it against their will, but not all. Even in the Shire there are some as
like minding other folk’s business and talking big. And there’s worse
than that: there’s a few as do spy-work for the Chief and his Men.’
‘Ah! So that’s how you had news of us, is it?’
‘That’s right. We aren’t allowed to send by it now, but they use
the old Quick Post service, and keep special runners at different
points. One came in from Whitfurrows last night with a ‘‘secret message’’, and another took it on from here. And a message came back
this afternoon saying you was to be arrested and taken to Bywater,
not direct to the Lockholes. The Chief wants to see you at once,
evidently.’

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1003

‘He won’t be so eager when Mr. Frodo has ﬁnished with him,’
said Sam.
The Shirriff-house at Frogmorton was as bad as the Bridge-house.
It had only one storey, but it had the same narrow windows, and it
was built of ugly pale bricks, badly laid. Inside it was damp and
cheerless, and supper was served on a long bare table that had not
been scrubbed for weeks. The food deserved no better setting. The
travellers were glad to leave the place. It was about eighteen miles
to Bywater, and they set off at ten o’clock in the morning. They
would have started earlier, only the delay so plainly annoyed the
Shirriff-leader. The west wind had shifted northward and it was turning colder, but the rain was gone.
It was rather a comic cavalcade that left the village, though the
few folk that came out to stare at the ‘get-up’ of the travellers did
not seem quite sure whether laughing was allowed. A dozen Shirriffs
had been told off as escort to the ‘prisoners’; but Merry made them
march in front, while Frodo and his friends rode behind. Merry,
Pippin, and Sam sat at their ease laughing and talking and singing,
while the Shirriffs stumped along trying to look stern and important.
Frodo, however, was silent and looked rather sad and thoughtful.
The last person they passed was a sturdy old gaffer clipping a
hedge. ‘Hullo, hullo!’ he jeered. ‘Now who’s arrested who?’
Two of the Shirriffs immediately left the party and went towards
him. ‘Leader!’ said Merry. ‘Order your fellows back to their places
at once, if you don’t want me to deal with them!’
The two hobbits at a sharp word from the leader came back sulkily.
‘Now get on!’ said Merry, and after that the travellers saw to it that
their ponies’ pace was quick enough to push the Shirriffs along as
fast as they could go. The sun came out, and in spite of the chilly
wind they were soon pufﬁng and sweating.
At the Three-Farthing Stone they gave it up. They had done nearly
fourteen miles with only one rest at noon. It was now three o’clock.
They were hungry and very footsore and they could not stand the
pace.
‘Well, come along in your own time!’ said Merry. ‘We are going on.’
‘Good-bye, Cock-robin!’ said Sam. ‘I’ll wait for you outside The
Green Dragon, if you haven’t forgotten where that is. Don’t dawdle
on the way!’
‘You’re breaking arrest, that’s what you’re doing,’ said the leader
ruefully, ‘and I can’t be answerable.’
‘We shall break a good many things yet, and not ask you to answer,’
said Pippin. ‘Good luck to you!’
*
*
*

1004

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The travellers trotted on, and as the sun began to sink towards
the White Downs far away on the western horizon they came to
Bywater by its wide pool; and there they had their ﬁrst really painful
shock. This was Frodo and Sam’s own country, and they found out
now that they cared about it more than any other place in the world.
Many of the houses that they had known were missing. Some seemed
to have been burned down. The pleasant row of old hobbit-holes in
the bank on the north side of the Pool were deserted, and their little
gardens that used to run down bright to the water’s edge were rank
with weeds. Worse, there was a whole line of the ugly new houses
all along Pool Side, where the Hobbiton Road ran close to the bank.
An avenue of trees had stood there. They were all gone. And looking
with dismay up the road towards Bag End they saw a tall chimney
of brick in the distance. It was pouring out black smoke into the
evening air.
Sam was beside himself. ‘I’m going right on, Mr. Frodo!’ he cried.
‘I’m going to see what’s up. I want to ﬁnd my gaffer.’
‘We ought to ﬁnd out ﬁrst what we’re in for, Sam,’ said Merry.
‘I guess that the ‘‘Chief ’’ will have a gang of rufﬁans handy. We had
better ﬁnd someone who will tell us how things are round here.’
But in the village of Bywater all the houses and holes were shut,
and no one greeted them. They wondered at this, but they soon
discovered the reason of it. When they reached The Green Dragon,
the last house on the Hobbiton side, now lifeless and with broken
windows, they were disturbed to see half a dozen large ill-favoured
Men lounging against the inn-wall; they were squint-eyed and sallowfaced.
‘Like that friend of Bill Ferny’s at Bree,’ said Sam.
‘Like many that I saw at Isengard,’ muttered Merry.
The rufﬁans had clubs in their hands and horns by their belts, but
they had no other weapons, as far as could be seen. As the travellers
rode up they left the wall and walked into the road, blocking the way.
‘Where d’you think you’re going?’ said one, the largest and most
evil-looking of the crew. ‘There’s no road for you any further. And
where are those precious Shirriffs?’
‘Coming along nicely,’ said Merry. ‘A little footsore, perhaps. We
promised to wait for them here.’
‘Garn, what did I say?’ said the rufﬁan to his mates. ‘I told Sharkey
it was no good trusting those little fools. Some of our chaps ought
to have been sent.’
‘And what difference would that have made, pray?’ said Merry.
‘We are not used to footpads in this country, but we know how to
deal with them.’

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1005

‘Footpads, eh?’ said the man. ‘So that’s your tone, is it? Change
it, or we’ll change it for you. You little folk are getting too uppish.
Don’t you trust too much in the Boss’s kind heart. Sharkey’s come
now, and he’ll do what Sharkey says.’
‘And what may that be?’ said Frodo quietly.
‘This country wants waking up and setting to rights,’ said the
rufﬁan, ‘and Sharkey’s going to do it; and make it hard, if you drive
him to it. You need a bigger Boss. And you’ll get one before the year
is out, if there’s any more trouble. Then you’ll learn a thing or two,
you little rat-folk.’
‘Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans,’ said Frodo. ‘I am on
my way to call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of
them too.’
The rufﬁan laughed. ‘Lotho! He knows all right. Don’t you worry.
He’ll do what Sharkey says. Because if a Boss gives trouble, we can
change him. See? And if little folks try to push in where they’re not
wanted, we can put them out of mischief. See?’
‘Yes, I see,’ said Frodo. ‘For one thing, I see that you’re behind
the times and the news here. Much has happened since you left the
South. Your day is over, and all other rufﬁans’. The Dark Tower has
fallen, and there is a King in Gondor. And Isengard has been
destroyed, and your precious master is a beggar in the wilderness. I
passed him on the road. The King’s messengers will ride up the
Greenway now, not bullies from Isengard.’
The man stared at him and smiled. ‘A beggar in the wilderness!’
he mocked. ‘Oh, is he indeed? Swagger it, swagger it, my little cock-awhoop. But that won’t stop us living in this fat little country where
you have lazed long enough. And’ – he snapped his ﬁngers in Frodo’s
face – ‘King’s messengers! That for them! When I see one, I’ll take
notice, perhaps.’
This was too much for Pippin. His thoughts went back to the
Field of Cormallen, and here was a squint-eyed rascal calling the
Ring-bearer ‘little cock-a-whoop’. He cast back his cloak, ﬂashed out
his sword, and the silver and sable of Gondor gleamed on him as he
rode forward.
‘I am a messenger of the King,’ he said. ‘You are speaking to the
King’s friend, and one of the most renowned in all the lands of the
West. You are a rufﬁan and a fool. Down on your knees in the road
and ask pardon, or I will set this troll’s bane in you!’
The sword glinted in the westering sun. Merry and Sam drew
their swords also and rode up to support Pippin; but Frodo did not
move. The rufﬁans gave back. Scaring Bree-land peasants, and bullying bewildered hobbits, had been their work. Fearless hobbits with
bright swords and grim faces were a great surprise. And there was a

1006

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

note in the voices of these newcomers that they had not heard before.
It chilled them with fear.
‘Go!’ said Merry. ‘If you trouble this village again, you will regret
it.’ The three hobbits came on, and then the rufﬁans turned and ﬂed,
running away up the Hobbiton Road; but they blew their horns as
they ran.
‘Well, we’ve come back none too soon,’ said Merry.
‘Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho,’
said Frodo. ‘Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him.’
‘Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean?’ said Pippin. ‘Destroy him,
I should say.’
‘I don’t think you quite understand things, Pippin,’ said Frodo.
‘Lotho never meant things to come to this pass. He has been a wicked
fool, but he’s caught now. The rufﬁans are on top, gathering, robbing
and bullying, and running or ruining things as they like, in his name.
And not in his name even for much longer. He’s a prisoner in Bag
End now, I expect, and very frightened. We ought to try and rescue
him.’
‘Well I am staggered!’ said Pippin. ‘Of all the ends to our journey
that is the very last I should have thought of: to have to ﬁght half-orcs
and rufﬁans in the Shire itself – to rescue Lotho Pimple!’
‘Fight?’ said Frodo. ‘Well, I suppose it may come to that. But
remember: there is to be no slaying of hobbits, not even if they have
gone over to the other side. Really gone over, I mean; not just obeying
rufﬁans’ orders because they are frightened. No hobbit has ever killed
another on purpose in the Shire, and it is not to begin now. And
nobody is to be killed at all, if it can be helped. Keep your tempers
and hold your hands to the last possible moment!’
‘But if there are many of these rufﬁans,’ said Merry, ‘it will certainly mean ﬁghting. You won’t rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by
being shocked and sad, my dear Frodo.’
‘No,’ said Pippin. ‘It won’t be so easy scaring them a second time.
They were taken by surprise. You heard that horn-blowing? Evidently
there are other rufﬁans near at hand. They’ll be much bolder when
there’s more of them together. We ought to think of taking cover
somewhere for the night. After all we’re only four, even if we are
armed.’
‘I’ve an idea,’ said Sam. ‘Let’s go to old Tom Cotton’s down
South Lane! He always was a stout fellow. And he has a lot of lads
that were all friends of mine.’
‘No!’ said Merry. ‘It’s no good ‘‘getting under cover’’. That is just
what people have been doing, and just what these rufﬁans like. They
will simply come down on us in force, corner us, and then drive us
out, or burn us in. No, we have got to do something at once.’

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1007

‘Do what?’ said Pippin.
‘Raise the Shire!’ said Merry. ‘Now! Wake all our people! They
hate all this, you can see: all of them except perhaps one or two
rascals, and a few fools that want to be important, but don’t at
all understand what is really going on. But Shire-folk have been so
comfortable so long they don’t know what to do. They just want a
match, though, and they’ll go up in ﬁre. The Chief ’s Men must know
that. They’ll try to stamp on us and put us out quick. We’ve only
got a very short time.
‘Sam, you can make a dash for Cotton’s farm, if you like. He’s
the chief person round here, and the sturdiest. Come on! I am going
to blow the horn of Rohan, and give them all some music they have
never heard before.’
They rode back to the middle of the village. There Sam turned
aside and galloped off down the lane that led south to Cotton’s. He
had not gone far when he heard a sudden clear horn-call go up ringing
into the sky. Far over hill and ﬁeld it echoed; and so compelling was
that call that Sam himself almost turned and dashed back. His pony
reared and neighed.
‘On, lad! On!’ he cried. ‘We’ll be going back soon.’
Then he heard Merry change the note, and up went the Horn-cry
of Buckland, shaking the air.
Awake! Awake! Fear, Fire, Foes! Awake!
Fire, Foes! Awake!
Behind him Sam heard a hubbub of voices and a great din and
slamming of doors. In front of him lights sprang out in the gloaming;
dogs barked; feet came running. Before he got to the lane’s end there
was Farmer Cotton with three of his lads, Young Tom, Jolly, and
Nick, hurrying towards him. They had axes in their hands, and barred
the way.
‘Nay! It’s not one of them rufﬁans,’ Sam heard the farmer say.
‘It’s a hobbit by the size of it, but all dressed up queer. Hey!’ he
cried. ‘Who are you, and what’s all this to-do?’
‘It’s Sam, Sam Gamgee. I’ve come back.’
Farmer Cotton came up close and stared at him in the twilight.
‘Well!’ he exclaimed. ‘The voice is right, and your face is no worse
than it was, Sam. But I should a’ passed you in the street in that
gear. You’ve been in foreign parts, seemingly. We feared you were
dead.’
‘That I ain’t!’ said Sam. ‘Nor Mr. Frodo. He’s here and his friends.

1008

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

And that’s the to-do. They’re raising the Shire. We’re going to clear
out these rufﬁans, and their Chief too. We’re starting now.’
‘Good, good!’ cried Farmer Cotton. ‘So it’s begun at last! I’ve
been itching for trouble all this year, but folks wouldn’t help. And
I’ve had the wife and Rosie to think of. These rufﬁans don’t stick at
nothing. But come on now, lads! Bywater is up! We must be in it!’
‘What about Mrs. Cotton and Rosie?’ said Sam. ‘It isn’t safe yet
for them to be left all alone.’
‘My Nibs is with them. But you can go and help him, if you have
a mind,’ said Farmer Cotton with a grin. Then he and his sons ran
off towards the village.
Sam hurried to the house. By the large round door at the top of
the steps from the wide yard stood Mrs. Cotton and Rosie, and Nibs
in front of them grasping a hay-fork.
‘It’s me!’ shouted Sam as he trotted up. ‘Sam Gamgee! So don’t
try prodding me, Nibs. Anyway, I’ve a mail-shirt on me.’
He jumped down from his pony and went up the steps. They
stared at him in silence. ‘Good evening, Mrs. Cotton!’ he said. ‘Hullo,
Rosie!’
‘Hullo, Sam!’ said Rosie. ‘Where’ve you been? They said you were
dead; but I’ve been expecting you since the spring. You haven’t
hurried, have you?’
‘Perhaps not,’ said Sam abashed. ‘But I’m hurrying now. We’re
setting about the rufﬁans, and I’ve got to get back to Mr. Frodo. But
I thought I’d have a look and see how Mrs. Cotton was keeping, and
you, Rosie.’
‘We’re keeping nicely, thank you,’ said Mrs. Cotton. ‘Or should
be, if it weren’t for these thieving rufﬁans.’
‘Well, be off with you!’ said Rosie. ‘If you’ve been looking after
Mr. Frodo all this while, what d’you want to leave him for, as soon
as things look dangerous?’
This was too much for Sam. It needed a week’s answer, or none.
He turned away and mounted his pony. But as he started off, Rosie
ran down the steps.
‘I think you look ﬁne, Sam,’ she said. ‘Go on now! But take care
of yourself, and come straight back as soon as you have settled the
rufﬁans!’
When Sam got back he found the whole village roused. Already,
apart from many younger lads, more than a hundred sturdy hobbits
were assembled with axes, and heavy hammers, and long knives, and
stout staves; and a few had hunting-bows. More were still coming in
from outlying farms.
Some of the village-folk had lit a large ﬁre, just to enliven things,

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1009

and also because it was one of the things forbidden by the Chief. It
burned bright as night came on. Others at Merry’s orders were setting
up barriers across the road at each end of the village. When the
Shirriffs came up to the lower one they were dumbfounded; but as
soon as they saw how things were, most of them took off their feathers
and joined in the revolt. The others slunk away.
Sam found Frodo and his friends by the ﬁre talking to old Tom
Cotton, while an admiring crowd of Bywater folk stood round and
stared.
‘Well, what’s the next move?’ said Farmer Cotton.
‘I can’t say,’ said Frodo, ‘until I know more. How many of these
rufﬁans are there?’
‘That’s hard to tell,’ said Cotton. ‘They moves about and comes
and goes. There’s sometimes ﬁfty of them in their sheds up Hobbiton
way; but they go out from there roving round, thieving or ‘‘gathering’’
as they call it. Still there’s seldom less than a score round the Boss,
as they names him. He’s at Bag End, or was; but he don’t go outside
the grounds now. No one’s seen him at all, in fact, for a week or
two; but the Men don’t let no one go near.’
‘Hobbiton’s not their only place, is it?’ said Pippin.
‘No, more’s the pity,’ said Cotton. ‘There’s a good few down
south in Longbottom and by Sarn Ford, I hear; and some more
lurking in the Woody End; and they’ve sheds at Waymeet. And then
there’s the Lockholes, as they call ’em: the old storage-tunnels at
Michel Delving that they’ve made into prisons for those as stand up
to them. Still I reckon there’s not above three hundred of them in
the Shire all told, and maybe less. We can master them, if we stick
together.’
‘Have they got any weapons?’ asked Merry.
‘Whips, knives, and clubs, enough for their dirty work: that’s all
they’ve showed so far,’ said Cotton. ‘But I dare say they’ve got other
gear, if it comes to ﬁghting. Some have bows, anyway. They’ve shot
one or two of our folk.’
‘There you are, Frodo!’ said Merry. ‘I knew we should have to
ﬁght. Well, they started the killing.’
‘Not exactly,’ said Cotton. ‘Leastways not the shooting. Tooks
started that. You see, your dad, Mr. Peregrin, he’s never had no
truck with this Lotho, not from the beginning: said that if anyone
was going to play the chief at this time of day, it would be the right
Thain of the Shire and no upstart. And when Lotho sent his Men
they got no change out of him. Tooks are lucky, they’ve got those
deep holes in the Green Hills, the Great Smials and all, and the
rufﬁans can’t come at ’em; and they won’t let the rufﬁans come on
their land. If they do, Tooks hunt ’em. Tooks shot three for prowling

1010

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

and robbing. After that the rufﬁans turned nastier. And they keep a
pretty close watch on Tookland. No one gets in nor out of it now.’
‘Good for the Tooks!’ cried Pippin. ‘But someone is going to get
in again, now. I am off to the Smials. Anyone coming with me to
Tuckborough?’
Pippin rode off with half a dozen lads on ponies. ‘See you soon!’
he cried. ‘It’s only fourteen miles or so over the ﬁelds. I’ll bring you
back an army of Tooks in the morning.’ Merry blew a horn-call after
them as they rode off into the gathering night. The people cheered.
‘All the same,’ said Frodo to all those who stood near, ‘I wish for
no killing; not even of the rufﬁans, unless it must be done, to prevent
them from hurting hobbits.’
‘All right!’ said Merry. ‘But we shall be having a visit from the
Hobbiton gang any time now, I think. They won’t come just to talk
things over. We’ll try to deal with them neatly, but we must be
prepared for the worst. Now I’ve got a plan.’
‘Very good,’ said Frodo. ‘You make the arrangements.’
Just then some hobbits, who had been sent out towards Hobbiton,
came running in. ‘They’re coming!’ they said. ‘A score or more. But
two have gone off west across country.’
‘To Waymeet, that’ll be,’ said Cotton, ‘to fetch more of the gang.
Well, it’s ﬁfteen mile each way. We needn’t trouble about them just
yet.’
Merry hurried off to give orders. Farmer Cotton cleared the street,
sending everyone indoors, except the older hobbits who had weapons
of some sort. They had not long to wait. Soon they could hear loud
voices, and then the tramping of heavy feet. Presently a whole squad
of the rufﬁans came down the road. They saw the barrier and laughed.
They did not imagine that there was anything in this little land that
would stand up to twenty of their kind together.
The hobbits opened the barrier and stood aside. ‘Thank you!’ the
Men jeered. ‘Now run home to bed before you’re whipped.’ Then
they marched along the street shouting: ‘Put those lights out! Get
indoors and stay there! Or we’ll take ﬁfty of you to the Lockholes
for a year. Get in! The Boss is losing his temper.’
No one paid any heed to their orders; but as the rufﬁans passed,
they closed in quietly behind and followed them. When the Men
reached the ﬁre there was Farmer Cotton standing all alone warming
his hands.
‘Who are you, and what d’you think you’re doing?’ said the
rufﬁan-leader.
Farmer Cotton looked at him slowly. ‘I was just going to ask you
that,’ he said. ‘This isn’t your country, and you’re not wanted.’
‘Well, you’re wanted anyhow,’ said the leader. ‘We want you. Take

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1011

him lads! Lockholes for him, and give him something to keep him
quiet!’
The Men took one step forward and stopped short. There rose a
roar of voices all round them, and suddenly they were aware that
Farmer Cotton was not all alone. They were surrounded. In the dark
on the edge of the ﬁrelight stood a ring of hobbits that had crept up
out of the shadows. There was nearly two hundred of them, all
holding some weapon.
Merry stepped forward. ‘We have met before,’ he said to the leader,
‘and I warned you not to come back here. I warn you again: you are
standing in the light and you are covered by archers. If you lay a
ﬁnger on this farmer, or on anyone else, you will be shot at once.
Lay down any weapons that you have!’
The leader looked round. He was trapped. But he was not scared,
not now with a score of his fellows to back him. He knew too little
of hobbits to understand his peril. Foolishly he decided to ﬁght. It
would be easy to break out.
‘At ’em, lads!’ he cried. ‘Let ’em have it!’
With a long knife in his left hand and a club in the other he made
a rush at the ring, trying to burst out back towards Hobbiton. He
aimed a savage blow at Merry who stood in his way. He fell dead
with four arrows in him.
That was enough for the others. They gave in. Their weapons
were taken from them, and they were roped together, and marched
off to an empty hut that they had built themselves, and there they
were tied hand and foot, and locked up under guard. The dead leader
was dragged off and buried.
‘Seems almost too easy after all, don’t it?’ said Cotton. ‘I said we
could master them. But we needed a call. You came back in the nick
o’ time, Mr. Merry.’
‘There’s more to be done still,’ said Merry. ‘If you’re right in your
reckoning, we haven’t dealt with a tithe of them yet. But it’s dark
now. I think the next stroke must wait until morning. Then we must
call on the Chief.’
‘Why not now?’ said Sam. ‘It’s not much more than six o’clock. And
I want to see my gaffer. D’you know what’s come of him, Mr. Cotton?’
‘He’s not too well, and not too bad, Sam,’ said the farmer. ‘They
dug up Bagshot Row, and that was a sad blow to him. He’s in one
of them new houses that the Chief ’s Men used to build while they
still did any work other than burning and thieving: not above a mile
from the end of Bywater. But he comes around to me, when he gets
a chance, and I see he’s better fed than some of the poor bodies. All
against The Rules, of course. I’d have had him with me, but that
wasn’t allowed.’

1012

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Thank’ee indeed, Mr. Cotton, and I’ll never forget it,’ said Sam.
‘But I want to see him. That Boss and that Sharkey, as they spoke
of, they might do a mischief up there before the morning.’
‘All right, Sam,’ said Cotton. ‘Choose a lad or two, and go and
fetch him to my house. You’ll not have need to go near the old
Hobbiton village over Water. My Jolly here will show you.’
Sam went off. Merry arranged for look-outs round the village and
guards at the barriers during the night. Then he and Frodo went off
with Farmer Cotton. They sat with the family in the warm kitchen,
and the Cottons asked a few polite questions about their travels, but
hardly listened to the answers: they were far more concerned with
events in the Shire.
‘It all began with Pimple, as we call him,’ said Farmer Cotton;
‘and it began as soon as you’d gone off, Mr. Frodo. He’d funny
ideas, had Pimple. Seems he wanted to own everything himself, and
then order other folk about. It soon came out that he already did
own a sight more than was good for him; and he was always grabbing
more, though where he got the money was a mystery: mills and
malt-houses and inns, and farms, and leaf-plantations. He’d already
bought Sandyman’s mill before he came to Bag End, seemingly.
‘Of course he started with a lot of property in the Southfarthing
which he had from his dad; and it seems he’d been selling a lot o’
the best leaf, and sending it away quietly for a year or two. But at
the end o’ last year he began sending away loads of stuff, not only
leaf. Things began to get short, and winter coming on, too. Folk got
angry, but he had his answer. A lot of Men, rufﬁans mostly, came
with great waggons, some to carry off the goods south-away, and
others to stay. And more came. And before we knew where we were
they were planted here and there all over the Shire, and were felling
trees and digging and building themselves sheds and houses just as
they liked. At ﬁrst goods and damage was paid for by Pimple; but
soon they began lording it around and taking what they wanted.
‘Then there was a bit of trouble, but not enough. Old Will the
Mayor set off for Bag End to protest, but he never got there. Rufﬁans
laid hands on him and took and locked him up in a hole in Michel
Delving, and there he is now. And after that, it would be soon after
New Year, there wasn’t no more Mayor, and Pimple called himself
Chief Shirriff, or just Chief, and did as he liked; and if anyone got
‘‘uppish’’ as they called it, they followed Will. So things went from
bad to worse. There wasn’t no smoke left, save for the Men; and the
Chief didn’t hold with beer, save for his Men, and closed all the inns;
and everything except Rules got shorter and shorter, unless one could
hide a bit of one’s own when the rufﬁans went round gathering stuff

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1013

up ‘‘for fair distribution’’: which meant they got it and we didn’t,
except for the leavings which you could have at the Shirriff-houses,
if you could stomach them. All very bad. But since Sharkey came
it’s been plain ruination.’
‘Who is this Sharkey?’ said Merry. ‘I heard one of the rufﬁans
speak of him.’
‘The biggest rufﬁan o’ the lot, seemingly,’ answered Cotton. ‘It
was about last harvest, end o’ September maybe, that we ﬁrst heard
of him. We’ve never seen him, but he’s up at Bag End; and he’s the
real Chief now, I guess. All the rufﬁans do what he says; and what
he says is mostly: hack, burn, and ruin; and now it’s come to killing.
There’s no longer even any bad sense in it. They cut down trees and
let ’em lie, they burn houses and build no more.
‘Take Sandyman’s mill now. Pimple knocked it down almost as
soon as he came to Bag End. Then he brought in a lot o’ dirty-looking
Men to build a bigger one and ﬁll it full o’ wheels and outlandish
contraptions. Only that fool Ted was pleased by that, and he works
there cleaning wheels for the Men, where his dad was the Miller and
his own master. Pimple’s idea was to grind more and faster, or so he
said. He’s got other mills like it. But you’ve got to have grist before
you can grind; and there was no more for the new mill to do than
for the old. But since Sharkey came they don’t grind no more corn
at all. They’re always a-hammering and a-letting out a smoke and a
stench, and there isn’t no peace even at night in Hobbiton. And they
pour out ﬁlth a purpose; they’ve fouled all the lower Water, and it’s
getting down into Brandywine. If they want to make the Shire into
a desert, they’re going the right way about it. I don’t believe that fool
of a Pimple’s behind all this. It’s Sharkey, I say.’
‘That’s right!’ put in Young Tom. ‘Why, they even took Pimple’s
old ma, that Lobelia, and he was fond of her, if no one else was. Some
of the Hobbiton folk, they saw it. She comes down the lane with her
old umberella. Some of the rufﬁans were going up with a big cart.
‘ ‘‘Where be you a-going?’’ says she.
‘ ‘‘To Bag End,’’ says they.
‘ ‘‘What for?’’ says she.
‘ ‘‘To put up some sheds for Sharkey,’’ says they.
‘ ‘‘Who said you could?’’ says she.
‘ ‘‘Sharkey,’’ says they. ‘‘So get out o’ the road, old hagling!’’
‘ ‘‘I’ll give you Sharkey, you dirty thieving rufﬁans!’’ says she, and
ups with her umberella and goes for the leader, near twice her size.
So they took her. Dragged her off to the Lockholes, at her age too.
They’ve took others we miss more, but there’s no denying she showed
more spirit than most.’
*
*
*

1014

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Into the middle of this talk came Sam, bursting in with his gaffer.
Old Gamgee did not look much older, but he was a little deafer.
‘Good evening, Mr. Baggins!’ he said. ‘Glad indeed I am to see
you safe back. But I’ve a bone to pick with you, in a manner o’
speaking, if I may make so bold. You didn’t never ought to have a’
sold Bag End, as I always said. That’s what started all the mischief.
And while you’ve been trapessing in foreign parts, chasing Black Men
up mountains from what my Sam says, though what for he don’t
make clear, they’ve been and dug up Bagshot Row and ruined my
taters!’
‘I am very sorry, Mr. Gamgee,’ said Frodo. ‘But now I’ve come
back, I’ll do my best to make amends.’
‘Well, you can’t say fairer than that,’ said the Gaffer. ‘Mr. Frodo
Baggins is a real gentlehobbit, I always have said, whatever you may
think of some others of the name, begging your pardon. And I hope
my Sam’s behaved hisself and given satisfaction?’
‘Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee,’ said Frodo. ‘Indeed, if you will
believe it, he’s now one of the most famous people in all the lands,
and they are making songs about his deeds from here to the Sea and
beyond the Great River.’ Sam blushed, but he looked gratefully at
Frodo, for Rosie’s eyes were shining and she was smiling at him.
‘It takes a lot o’ believing,’ said the Gaffer, ‘though I can see he’s
been mixing in strange company. What’s come of his weskit? I don’t
hold with wearing ironmongery, whether it wears well or no.’
Farmer Cotton’s household and all his guests were up early next
morning. Nothing had been heard in the night, but more trouble
would certainly come before the day was old. ‘Seems as if none o’
the rufﬁans were left up at Bag End,’ said Cotton; ‘but the gang from
Waymeet will be along any time now.’
After breakfast a messenger from the Tookland rode in. He was
in high spirits. ‘The Thain has raised all our country,’ he said, ‘and
the news is going like ﬁre all ways. The rufﬁans that were watching
our land have ﬂed off south, those that escaped alive. The Thain has
gone after them, to hold off the big gang down that way; but he’s
sent Mr. Peregrin back with all the other folk he can spare.’
The next news was less good. Merry, who had been out all night,
came riding in about ten o’clock. ‘There’s a big band about four
miles away,’ he said. ‘They’re coming along the road from Waymeet,
but a good many stray rufﬁans have joined up with them. There must
be close on a hundred of them; and they’re ﬁre-raising as they come.
Curse them!’
‘Ah! This lot won’t stay to talk, they’ll kill, if they can,’ said Farmer
Cotton. ‘If Tooks don’t come sooner, we’d best get behind cover

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1015

and shoot without arguing. There’s got to be some ﬁghting before
this is settled, Mr. Frodo.’
The Tooks did come sooner. Before long they marched in, a hundred strong, from Tuckborough and the Green Hills with Pippin at
their head. Merry now had enough sturdy hobbitry to deal with the
rufﬁans. Scouts reported that they were keeping close together. They
knew that the countryside had risen against them, and plainly meant
to deal with the rebellion ruthlessly, at its centre in Bywater. But
however grim they might be, they seemed to have no leader among
them who understood warfare. They came on without any precautions. Merry laid his plans quickly.
The rufﬁans came tramping along the East Road, and without
halting turned up the Bywater Road, which ran for some way sloping
up between high banks with low hedges on top. Round a bend, about
a furlong from the main road, they met a stout barrier of old farmcarts upturned. That halted them. At the same moment they became
aware that the hedges on both sides, just above their heads, were all
lined with hobbits. Behind them other hobbits now pushed out some
more waggons that had been hidden in a ﬁeld, and so blocked the
way back. A voice spoke to them from above.
‘Well, you have walked into a trap,’ said Merry. ‘Your fellows
from Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the rest are prisoners. Lay down your weapons! Then go back twenty paces and sit
down. Any who try to break out will be shot.’
But the rufﬁans could not now be cowed so easily. A few of them
obeyed, but were immediately set on by their fellows. A score or
more broke back and charged the waggons. Six were shot, but the
remainder burst out, killing two hobbits, and then scattering across
country in the direction of the Woody End. Two more fell as they
ran. Merry blew a loud horn-call, and there were answering calls
from a distance.
‘They won’t get far,’ said Pippin. ‘All that country is alive with
our hunters now.’
Behind, the trapped Men in the lane, still about four score, tried
to climb the barrier and the banks, and the hobbits were obliged to
shoot many of them or hew them with axes. But many of the strongest
and most desperate got out on the west side, and attacked their
enemies ﬁercely, being now more bent on killing than escaping. Several hobbits fell, and the rest were wavering, when Merry and Pippin,
who were on the east side, came across and charged the rufﬁans.
Merry himself slew the leader, a great squint-eyed brute like a huge
orc. Then he drew his forces off, encircling the last remnant of the
Men in a wide ring of archers.

1016

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

At last all was over. Nearly seventy of the rufﬁans lay dead on the
ﬁeld, and a dozen were prisoners. Nineteen hobbits were killed, and
some thirty were wounded. The dead rufﬁans were laden on waggons
and hauled off to an old sand-pit nearby and there buried: in the
Battle Pit, as it was afterwards called. The fallen hobbits were laid
together in a grave on the hill-side, where later a great stone was set
up with a garden about it. So ended the Battle of Bywater, 1419, the
last battle fought in the Shire, and the only battle since the
Greenﬁelds, 1147, away up in the Northfarthing. In consequence,
though it happily cost very few lives, it has a chapter to itself in the
Red Book, and the names of all those who took part were made into
a Roll, and learned by heart by Shire-historians. The very considerable rise in the fame and fortune of the Cottons dates from this time;
but at the top of the Roll in all accounts stand the names of Captains
Meriadoc and Peregrin.
Frodo had been in the battle, but he had not drawn sword, and
his chief part had been to prevent the hobbits in their wrath at their
losses, from slaying those of their enemies who threw down their
weapons. When the ﬁghting was over, and the later labours were
ordered, Merry, Pippin, and Sam joined him, and they rode back
with the Cottons. They ate a late midday meal, and then Frodo said
with a sigh: ‘Well, I suppose it is time now that we dealt with the
‘‘Chief ’’.’
‘Yes indeed; the sooner the better,’ said Merry. ‘And don’t be too
gentle! He’s responsible for bringing in these rufﬁans, and for all the
evil they have done.’
Farmer Cotton collected an escort of some two dozen sturdy hobbits. ‘For it’s only a guess that there is no rufﬁans left at Bag End,’
he said. ‘We don’t know.’ Then they set out on foot. Frodo, Sam,
Merry, and Pippin led the way.
It was one of the saddest hours in their lives. The great chimney
rose up before them; and as they drew near the old village across the
Water, through rows of new mean houses along each side of the road,
they saw the new mill in all its frowning and dirty ugliness: a great
brick building straddling the stream, which it fouled with a steaming
and stinking outﬂow. All along the Bywater Road every tree had been
felled.
As they crossed the bridge and looked up the Hill they gasped.
Even Sam’s vision in the Mirror had not prepared him for what they
saw. The Old Grange on the west side had been knocked down, and
its place taken by rows of tarred sheds. All the chestnuts were gone.
The banks and hedgerows were broken. Great waggons were standing
in disorder in a ﬁeld beaten bare of grass. Bagshot Row was a yawning

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1017

sand and gravel quarry. Bag End up beyond could not be seen for a
clutter of large huts.
‘They’ve cut it down!’ cried Sam. ‘They’ve cut down the Party
Tree!’ He pointed to where the tree had stood under which Bilbo
had made his Farewell Speech. It was lying lopped and dead in the
ﬁeld. As if this was the last straw Sam burst into tears.
A laugh put an end to them. There was a surly hobbit lounging over
the low wall of the mill-yard. He was grimy-faced and black-handed.
‘Don’t ’ee like it, Sam?’ he sneered. ‘But you always was soft. I
thought you’d gone off in one o’ them ships you used to prattle
about, sailing, sailing. What d’you want to come back for? We’ve
work to do in the Shire now.’
‘So I see,’ said Sam. ‘No time for washing, but time for wallpropping. But see here, Master Sandyman, I’ve a score to pay in this
village, and don’t you make it any longer with your jeering, or you’ll
foot a bill too big for your purse.’
Ted Sandyman spat over the wall. ‘Garn!’ he said. ‘You can’t
touch me. I’m a friend o’ the Boss’s. But he’ll touch you all right, if
I have any more of your mouth.’
‘Don’t waste any more words on the fool, Sam!’ said Frodo.
‘I hope there are not many more hobbits that have become like this.
It would be a worse trouble than all the damage the Men have
done.’
‘You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman,’ said Merry. ‘And also
very much out of your reckoning. We are just going up the Hill to
remove your precious Boss. We have dealt with his Men.’
Ted gaped, for at that moment he ﬁrst caught sight of the escort
that at a sign from Merry now marched over the bridge. Dashing
back into the mill he ran out with a horn and blew it loudly.
‘Save your breath!’ laughed Merry. ‘I’ve a better.’ Then lifting up
his silver horn he winded it, and its clear call rang over the Hill; and
out of the holes and sheds and shabby houses of Hobbiton the hobbits
answered, and came pouring out, and with cheers and loud cries they
followed the company up the road to Bag End.
At the top of the lane the party halted, and Frodo and his friends
went on; and they came at last to the once beloved place. The garden
was full of huts and sheds, some so near the old westward windows
that they cut off all their light. There were piles of refuse everywhere.
The door was scarred; the bell-chain was dangling loose, and the bell
would not ring. Knocking brought no answer. At length they pushed
and the door yielded. They went in. The place stank and was full
of ﬁlth and disorder: it did not appear to have been used for some
time.
*
*
*

1018

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

‘Where is that miserable Lotho hiding?’ said Merry. They had
searched every room and found no living thing save rats and mice.
‘Shall we turn on the others to search the sheds?’
‘This is worse than Mordor!’ said Sam. ‘Much worse in a way. It
comes home to you, as they say; because it is home, and you remember it before it was all ruined.’
‘Yes, this is Mordor,’ said Frodo. ‘Just one of its works. Saruman
was doing its work all the time, even when he thought he was working
for himself. And the same with those that Saruman tricked, like
Lotho.’
Merry looked round in dismay and disgust. ‘Let’s get out!’ he said.
‘If I had known all the mischief he had caused, I should have stuffed
my pouch down Saruman’s throat.’
‘No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I am able to welcome
you home.’ There standing at the door was Saruman himself, looking well-fed and well-pleased; his eyes gleamed with malice and
amusement.
A sudden light broke on Frodo. ‘Sharkey!’ he cried.
Saruman laughed. ‘So you have heard the name, have you? All
my people used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of
affection, possibly.* But evidently you did not expect to see me here.’
‘I did not,’ said Frodo. ‘But I might have guessed. A little mischief
in a mean way: Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of it.’
‘Quite capable,’ said Saruman, ‘and more than a little. You made
me laugh, you hobbit-lordlings, riding along with all those great
people, so secure and so pleased with your little selves. You thought
you had done very well out of it all, and could now just amble back
and have a nice quiet time in the country. Saruman’s home could
be all wrecked, and he could be turned out, but no one could touch
yours. Oh no! Gandalf would look after your affairs.’
Saruman laughed again. ‘Not he! When his tools have done their
task he drops them. But you must go dangling after him, dawdling
and talking, and riding round twice as far as you needed. ‘‘Well,’’
thought I, ‘‘if they’re such fools, I will get ahead of them and teach
them a lesson. One ill turn deserves another.’’ It would have been a
sharper lesson, if only you had given me a little more time and more
Men. Still I have already done much that you will ﬁnd it hard to
mend or undo in your lives. And it will be pleasant to think of that
and set it against my injuries.’
‘Well, if that is what you ﬁnd pleasure in,’ said Frodo, ‘I pity you.
It will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never
return!’
* It was probably Orkish in origin: sharkû, ‘old man’.

THE SCOURING OF THE SHIRE

1019

The hobbits of the villages had seen Saruman come out of one of
the huts, and at once they came crowding up to the door of Bag
End. When they heard Frodo’s command, they murmured angrily:
‘Don’t let him go! Kill him! He’s a villain and a murderer. Kill
him!’
Saruman looked round at their hostile faces and smiled. ‘Kill him!’
he mocked. ‘Kill him, if you think there are enough of you, my brave
hobbits!’ He drew himself up and stared at them darkly with his black
eyes. ‘But do not think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my
power! Whoever strikes me shall be accursed. And if my blood stains
the Shire, it shall wither and never again be healed.’
The hobbits recoiled. But Frodo said: ‘Do not believe him! He
has lost all power, save his voice that can still daunt you and deceive
you, if you let it. But I will not have him slain. It is useless to meet
revenge with revenge: it will heal nothing. Go, Saruman, by the
speediest way!’
‘Worm! Worm!’ Saruman called; and out of a nearby hut came
Wormtongue, crawling, almost like a dog. ‘To the road again, Worm!’
said Saruman. ‘These ﬁne fellows and lordlings are turning us adrift
again. Come along!’
Saruman turned to go, and Wormtongue shufﬂed after him. But
even as Saruman passed close to Frodo a knife ﬂashed in his hand,
and he stabbed swiftly. The blade turned on the hidden mail-coat
and snapped. A dozen hobbits, led by Sam, leaped forward with a
cry and ﬂung the villain to the ground. Sam drew his sword.
‘No, Sam!’ said Frodo. ‘Do not kill him even now. For he has not
hurt me. And in any case I do not wish him to be slain in this evil
mood. He was great once, of a noble kind that we should not dare
to raise our hands against. He is fallen, and his cure is beyond us;
but I would still spare him, in the hope that he may ﬁnd it.’
Saruman rose to his feet, and stared at Frodo. There was a strange
look in his eyes of mingled wonder and respect and hatred. ‘You
have grown, Halﬂing,’ he said. ‘Yes, you have grown very much. You
are wise, and cruel. You have robbed my revenge of sweetness, and
now I must go hence in bitterness, in debt to your mercy. I hate it
and you! Well, I go and I will trouble you no more. But do not expect
me to wish you health and long life. You will have neither. But that
is not my doing. I merely foretell.’
He walked away, and the hobbits made a lane for him to pass;
but their knuckles whitened as they gripped on their weapons. Wormtongue hesitated, and then followed his master.
‘Wormtongue!’ called Frodo. ‘You need not follow him. I know
of no evil you have done to me. You can have rest and food here for
a while, until you are stronger and can go your own ways.’

1020

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Wormtongue halted and looked back at him, half prepared to stay.
Saruman turned. ‘No evil?’ he cackled. ‘Oh no! Even when he sneaks
out at night it is only to look at the stars. But did I hear someone
ask where poor Lotho is hiding? You know, don’t you, Worm? Will
you tell them?’
Wormtongue cowered down and whimpered: ‘No, no!’
‘Then I will,’ said Saruman. ‘Worm killed your Chief, poor little
fellow, your nice little Boss. Didn’t you, Worm? Stabbed him in his
sleep, I believe. Buried him, I hope; though Worm has been very
hungry lately. No, Worm is not really nice. You had better leave him
to me.’
A look of wild hatred came into Wormtongue’s red eyes. ‘You
told me to; you made me do it,’ he hissed.
Saruman laughed. ‘You do what Sharkey says, always, don’t you,
Worm? Well, now he says: follow!’ He kicked Wormtongue in the
face as he grovelled, and turned and made off. But at that something
snapped: suddenly Wormtongue rose up, drawing a hidden knife,
and then with a snarl like a dog he sprang on Saruman’s back, jerked
his head back, cut his throat, and with a yell ran off down the lane.
Before Frodo could recover or speak a word, three hobbit-bows
twanged and Wormtongue fell dead.
To the dismay of those that stood by, about the body of Saruman
a grey mist gathered, and rising slowly to a great height like smoke
from a ﬁre, as a pale shrouded ﬁgure it loomed over the Hill. For a
moment it wavered, looking to the West; but out of the West came
a cold wind, and it bent away, and with a sigh dissolved into nothing.
Frodo looked down at the body with pity and horror, for as he
looked it seemed that long years of death were suddenly revealed in
it, and it shrank, and the shrivelled face became rags of skin upon a
hideous skull. Lifting up the skirt of the dirty cloak that sprawled
beside it, he covered it over, and turned away.
‘And that’s the end of that,’ said Sam. ‘A nasty end, and I wish I
needn’t have seen it; but it’s a good riddance.’
‘And the very last end of the War, I hope,’ said Merry.
‘I hope so,’ said Frodo and sighed. ‘The very last stroke. But to
think that it should fall here, at the very door of Bag End! Among
all my hopes and fears at least I never expected that.’
‘I shan’t call it the end, till we’ve cleared up the mess,’ said Sam
gloomily. ‘And that’ll take a lot of time and work.’

Chapter 9
T H E G R E Y H AV E N S
The clearing up certainly needed a lot of work, but it took less time
than Sam had feared. The day after the battle Frodo rode to Michel
Delving and released the prisoners from the Lockholes. One of the
ﬁrst that they found was poor Fredegar Bolger, Fatty no longer.
He had been taken when the rufﬁans smoked out a band of rebels
that he led from their hidings up in the Brockenbores by the hills of
Scary.
‘You would have done better to come with us after all, poor old
Fredegar!’ said Pippin, as they carried him out too weak to walk.
He opened an eye and tried gallantly to smile. ‘Who’s this young
giant with the loud voice?’ he whispered. ‘Not little Pippin! What’s
your size in hats now?’
Then there was Lobelia. Poor thing, she looked very old and thin
when they rescued her from a dark and narrow cell. She insisted on
hobbling out on her own feet; and she had such a welcome, and
there was such clapping and cheering when she appeared, leaning on
Frodo’s arm but still clutching her umbrella, that she was quite
touched, and drove away in tears. She had never in her life been
popular before. But she was crushed by the news of Lotho’s murder,
and she would not return to Bag End. She gave it back to Frodo,
and went to her own people, the Bracegirdles of Hardbottle.
When the poor creature died next spring – she was after all more
than a hundred years old – Frodo was surprised and much moved:
she had left all that remained of her money and of Lotho’s for him
to use in helping hobbits made homeless by the troubles. So that
feud was ended.
Old Will Whitfoot had been in the Lockholes longer than any,
and though he had perhaps been treated less harshly than some, he
needed a lot of feeding up before he could look the part of Mayor;
so Frodo agreed to act as his Deputy, until Mr. Whitfoot was in
shape again. The only thing that he did as Deputy Mayor was to
reduce the Shirriffs to their proper functions and numbers. The task
of hunting out the last remnant of the rufﬁans was left to Merry and
Pippin, and it was soon done. The southern gangs, after hearing the
news of the Battle of Bywater, ﬂed out of the land and offered little
resistance to the Thain. Before the Year’s End the few survivors were
rounded up in the woods, and those that surrendered were shown
to the borders.

1022

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Meanwhile the labour of repair went on apace, and Sam was kept
very busy. Hobbits can work like bees when the mood and the need
comes on them. Now there were thousands of willing hands of all
ages, from the small but nimble ones of the hobbit lads and lasses
to the well-worn and horny ones of the gaffers and gammers. Before
Yule not a brick was left standing of the new Shirriff-houses or of
anything that had been built by ‘Sharkey’s Men’; but the bricks were
used to repair many an old hole, to make it snugger and drier. Great
stores of goods and food, and beer, were found that had been hidden
away by the rufﬁans in sheds and barns and deserted holes, and
especially in the tunnels at Michel Delving and in the old quarries
at Scary; so that there was a great deal better cheer that Yule than
anyone had hoped for.
One of the ﬁrst things done in Hobbiton, before even the removal
of the new mill, was the clearing of the Hill and Bag End, and the
restoration of Bagshot Row. The front of the new sand-pit was all
levelled and made into a large sheltered garden, and new holes were
dug in the southward face, back into the Hill, and they were lined
with brick. The Gaffer was restored to Number Three; and he said
often and did not care who heard it:
‘It’s an ill wind as blows nobody no good, as I always say. And
All’s well as ends Better!’
There was some discussion of the name that the new row should
be given. Battle Gardens was thought of, or Better Smials. But after a
while in sensible hobbit-fashion it was just called New Row. It was a
purely Bywater joke to refer to it as Sharkey’s End.
The trees were the worst loss and damage, for at Sharkey’s bidding
they had been cut down recklessly far and wide over the Shire; and
Sam grieved over this more than anything else. For one thing, this
hurt would take long to heal, and only his great-grandchildren, he
thought, would see the Shire as it ought to be.
Then suddenly one day, for he had been too busy for weeks to
give a thought to his adventures, he remembered the gift of Galadriel.
He brought the box out and showed it to the other Travellers (for
so they were now called by everyone), and asked their advice.
‘I wondered when you would think of it,’ said Frodo. ‘Open
it!’
Inside it was ﬁlled with a grey dust, soft and ﬁne, in the middle
of which was a seed, like a small nut with a silver shale. ‘What can
I do with this?’ said Sam.
‘Throw it in the air on a breezy day and let it do its work!’ said
Pippin.
‘On what?’ said Sam.

T H E G R E Y H AV E N S

1023

‘Choose one spot as a nursery, and see what happens to the plants
there,’ said Merry.
‘But I’m sure the Lady would not like me to keep it all for my
own garden, now so many folk have suffered,’ said Sam.
‘Use all the wits and knowledge you have of your own, Sam,’ said
Frodo, ‘and then use the gift to help your work and better it. And
use it sparingly. There is not much here, and I expect every grain
has a value.’
So Sam planted saplings in all the places where specially beautiful
or beloved trees had been destroyed, and he put a grain of the precious
dust in the soil at the root of each. He went up and down the Shire
in this labour; but if he paid special attention to Hobbiton and
Bywater no one blamed him. And at the end he found that he still
had a little of the dust left; so he went to the Three-Farthing Stone,
which is as near the centre of the Shire as no matter, and cast it in
the air with his blessing. The little silver nut he planted in the Party
Field where the tree had once been; and he wondered what would
come of it. All through the winter he remained as patient as he could,
and tried to restrain himself from going round constantly to see if
anything was happening.
Spring surpassed his wildest hopes. His trees began to sprout and
grow, as if time was in a hurry and wished to make one year do for
twenty. In the Party Field a beautiful young sapling leaped up: it had
silver bark and long leaves and burst into golden ﬂowers in April. It
was indeed a mallorn, and it was the wonder of the neighbourhood.
In after years, as it grew in grace and beauty, it was known far and
wide and people would come long journeys to see it: the only mallorn
west of the Mountains and east of the Sea, and one of the ﬁnest in
the world.
Altogether 1420 in the Shire was a marvellous year. Not only was
there wonderful sunshine and delicious rain, in due times and perfect
measure, but there seemed something more: an air of richness and
growth, and a gleam of a beauty beyond that of mortal summers that
ﬂicker and pass upon this Middle-earth. All the children born or
begotten in that year, and there were many, were fair to see and
strong, and most of them had a rich golden hair that had before been
rare among hobbits. The fruit was so plentiful that young hobbits
very nearly bathed in strawberries and cream; and later they sat on
the lawns under the plum-trees and ate, until they had made piles
of stones like small pyramids or the heaped skulls of a conqueror,
and then they moved on. And no one was ill, and everyone was
pleased, except those who had to mow the grass.
In the Southfarthing the vines were laden, and the yield of ‘leaf ’

1024

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

was astonishing; and everywhere there was so much corn that at
Harvest every barn was stuffed. The Northfarthing barley was so ﬁne
that the beer of 1420 malt was long remembered and became a
byword. Indeed a generation later one might hear an old gaffer in an
inn, after a good pint of well-earned ale, put down his mug with a
sigh: ‘Ah! that was proper fourteen-twenty, that was!’
Sam stayed at ﬁrst at the Cottons’ with Frodo; but when the New
Row was ready he went with the Gaffer. In addition to all his other
labours he was busy directing the cleaning up and restoring of Bag
End; but he was often away in the Shire on his forestry work. So he
was not at home in early March and did not know that Frodo had
been ill. On the thirteenth of that month Farmer Cotton found Frodo
lying on his bed; he was clutching a white gem that hung on a chain
about his neck and he seemed half in a dream.
‘It is gone for ever,’ he said, ‘and now all is dark and empty.’
But the ﬁt passed, and when Sam got back on the twenty-ﬁfth,
Frodo had recovered, and he said nothing about himself. In the
meanwhile Bag End had been set in order, and Merry and Pippin
came over from Crickhollow bringing back all the old furniture and
gear, so that the old hole soon looked very much as it always had
done.
When all was at last ready Frodo said: ‘When are you going to
move in and join me, Sam?’
Sam looked a bit awkward.
‘There is no need to come yet, if you don’t want to,’ said Frodo.
‘But you know the Gaffer is close at hand, and he will be very well
looked after by Widow Rumble.’
‘It’s not that, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam, and he went very red.
‘Well, what is it?’
‘It’s Rosie, Rose Cotton,’ said Sam. ‘It seems she didn’t like my
going abroad at all, poor lass; but as I hadn’t spoken, she couldn’t
say so. And I didn’t speak, because I had a job to do ﬁrst. But now
I have spoken, and she says: ‘‘Well, you’ve wasted a year, so why
wait longer?’’ ‘‘Wasted?’’ I says. ‘‘I wouldn’t call it that.’’ Still I see
what she means. I feel torn in two, as you might say.’
‘I see,’ said Frodo: ‘you want to get married, and yet you want to
live with me in Bag End too? But my dear Sam, how easy! Get
married as soon as you can, and then move in with Rosie. There’s
room enough in Bag End for as big a family as you could wish for.’
And so it was settled. Sam Gamgee married Rose Cotton in the
spring of 1420 (which was also famous for its weddings), and they
came and lived at Bag End. And if Sam thought himself lucky,

T H E G R E Y H AV E N S

1025

Frodo knew that he was more lucky himself; for there was not a
hobbit in the Shire that was looked after with such care. When the
labours of repair had all been planned and set going he took to a
quiet life, writing a great deal and going through all his notes. He
resigned the ofﬁce of Deputy Mayor at the Free Fair that Midsummer, and dear old Will Whitfoot had another seven years of
presiding at Banquets.
Merry and Pippin lived together for some time at Crickhollow,
and there was much coming and going between Buckland and Bag
End. The two young Travellers cut a great dash in the Shire with
their songs and their tales and their ﬁnery, and their wonderful parties. ‘Lordly’ folk called them, meaning nothing but good; for it
warmed all hearts to see them go riding by with their mail-shirts so
bright and their shields so splendid, laughing and singing songs of
far away; and if they were now large and magniﬁcent, they were
unchanged otherwise, unless they were indeed more fairspoken and
more jovial and full of merriment than ever before.
Frodo and Sam, however, went back to ordinary attire, except
that when there was need they both wore long grey cloaks, ﬁnely
woven and clasped at the throat with beautiful brooches; and Mr.
Frodo wore always a white jewel on a chain that he often would
ﬁnger.
All things now went well, with hope always of becoming still
better; and Sam was as busy and as full of delight as even a hobbit
could wish. Nothing for him marred that whole year, except for some
vague anxiety about his master. Frodo dropped quietly out of all the
doings of the Shire, and Sam was pained to notice how little honour
he had in his own country. Few people knew or wanted to know
about his deeds and adventures; their admiration and respect were
given mostly to Mr. Meriadoc and Mr. Peregrin and (if Sam had
known it) to himself. Also in the autumn there appeared a shadow
of old troubles.
One evening Sam came into the study and found his master looking
very strange. He was very pale and his eyes seemed to see things far
away.
‘What’s the matter, Mr. Frodo?’ said Sam.
‘I am wounded,’ he answered, ‘wounded; it will never really heal.’
But then he got up, and the turn seemed to pass, and he was quite
himself the next day. It was not until afterwards that Sam recalled
that the date was October the sixth. Two years before on that day it
was dark in the dell under Weathertop.
Time went on, and 1421 came in. Frodo was ill again in March,
but with a great effort he concealed it, for Sam had other things to

1026

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

think about. The ﬁrst of Sam and Rosie’s children was born on the
twenty-ﬁfth of March, a date that Sam noted.
‘Well, Mr. Frodo,’ he said. ‘I’m in a bit of a ﬁx. Rose and me had
settled to call him Frodo, with your leave; but it’s not him, it’s her.
Though as pretty a maidchild as anyone could hope for, taking after
Rose more than me, luckily. So we don’t know what to do.’
‘Well, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘what’s wrong with the old customs?
Choose a ﬂower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire
are called by such names, and what could be better?’
‘I suppose you’re right, Mr. Frodo,’ said Sam. ‘I’ve heard some
beautiful names on my travels, but I suppose they’re a bit too grand
for daily wear and tear, as you might say. The Gaffer, he says: ‘‘Make
it short, and then you won’t have to cut it short before you can use
it.’’ But if it’s to be a ﬂower-name, then I don’t trouble about the
length: it must be a beautiful ﬂower, because, you see, I think she is
very beautiful, and is going to be beautifuller still.’
Frodo thought for a moment. ‘Well, Sam, what about elanor, the
sun-star, you remember the little golden ﬂower in the grass of
Lothlórien?’
‘You’re right again, Mr. Frodo!’ said Sam delighted. ‘That’s what
I wanted.’
Little Elanor was nearly six months old, and 1421 had passed to
its autumn, when Frodo called Sam into the study.
‘It will be Bilbo’s Birthday on Thursday, Sam,’ he said. ‘And he
will pass the Old Took. He will be a hundred and thirty-one!’
‘So he will!’ said Sam. ‘He’s a marvel!’
‘Well, Sam,’ said Frodo, ‘I want you to see Rose and ﬁnd out if
she can spare you, so that you and I can go off together. You can’t
go far or for a long time now, of course,’ he said a little wistfully.
‘Well, not very well, Mr. Frodo.’
‘Of course not. But never mind. You can see me on my way. Tell
Rose that you won’t be away very long, not more than a fortnight;
and you’ll come back quite safe.’
‘I wish I could go all the way with you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo,
and see Mr. Bilbo,’ said Sam. ‘And yet the only place I really want
to be in is here. I am that torn in two.’
‘Poor Sam! It will feel like that, I am afraid,’ said Frodo. ‘But you
will be healed. You were meant to be solid and whole, and you will be.’
In the next day or two Frodo went through his papers and his
writings with Sam, and he handed over his keys. There was a big
book with plain red leather covers; its tall pages were now almost
ﬁlled. At the beginning there were many leaves covered with Bilbo’s

T H E G R E Y H AV E N S

1027

thin wandering hand; but most of it was written in Frodo’s ﬁrm
ﬂowing script. It was divided into chapters but Chapter 80 was
unﬁnished, and after that were some blank leaves. The title page had
many titles on it, crossed out one after another, so:
My Diary. My Unexpected Journey. There and Back Again. And
What Happened After.
Adventures of Five Hobbits. The Tale of the Great Ring, compiled by
Bilbo Baggins from his own observations and the accounts of his friends.
What we did in the War of the Ring.
Here Bilbo’s hand ended and Frodo had written:
the downfall
of the
lord of the rings
and the
return of the king
(as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs of Bilbo and
Frodo of the Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends
and the learning of the Wise.)
Together with extracts from Books of Lore translated by Bilbo
in Rivendell.
‘Why, you have nearly ﬁnished it, Mr. Frodo!’ Sam exclaimed.
‘Well, you have kept at it, I must say.’
‘I have quite ﬁnished, Sam,’ said Frodo. ‘The last pages are for you.’
On September the twenty-ﬁrst they set out together, Frodo on the
pony that had borne him all the way from Minas Tirith, and was
now called Strider; and Sam on his beloved Bill. It was a fair golden
morning, and Sam did not ask where they were going: he thought
he could guess.
They took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the
Woody End, and they let their ponies walk at their leisure. They
camped in the Green Hills, and on September the twenty-second
they rode gently down into the beginning of the trees as afternoon
was wearing away.
‘If that isn’t the very tree you hid behind when the Black Rider
ﬁrst showed up, Mr. Frodo!’ said Sam pointing to the left. ‘It seems
like a dream now.’
*
*
*

1028

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

It was evening, and the stars were glimmering in the eastern sky
as they passed the ruined oak and turned and went on down the hill
between the hazel-thickets. Sam was silent, deep in his memories.
Presently he became aware that Frodo was singing softly to himself,
singing the old walking-song, but the words were not quite the same.
Still round the corner there may wait
A new road or a secret gate;
And though I oft have passed them by,
A day will come at last when I
Shall take the hidden paths that run
West of the Moon, East of the Sun.
And as if in answer, from down below, coming up the road out of
the valley, voices sang:
A! Elbereth Gilthoniel!
silivren penna mı́riel
o menel aglar elenath,
Gilthoniel, A! Elbereth!
We still remember, we who dwell
In this far land beneath the trees
The starlight on the Western Seas.
Frodo and Sam halted and sat silent in the soft shadows, until
they saw a shimmer as the travellers came towards them.
There was Gildor and many fair Elven folk; and there to Sam’s
wonder rode Elrond and Galadriel. Elrond wore a mantle of grey
and had a star upon his forehead, and a silver harp was in his hand,
and upon his ﬁnger was a ring of gold with a great blue stone, Vilya,
mightiest of the Three. But Galadriel sat upon a white palfrey and
was robed all in glimmering white, like clouds about the Moon; for
she herself seemed to shine with a soft light. On her ﬁnger was Nenya,
the ring wrought of mithril, that bore a single white stone ﬂickering
like a frosty star. Riding slowly behind on a small grey pony, and
seeming to nod in his sleep, was Bilbo himself.
Elrond greeted them gravely and graciously, and Galadriel smiled
upon them. ‘Well, Master Samwise,’ she said. ‘I hear and see that
you have used my gift well. The Shire shall now be more than ever
blessed and beloved.’ Sam bowed, but found nothing to say. He had
forgotten how beautiful the Lady was.
Then Bilbo woke up and opened his eyes. ‘Hullo, Frodo!’ he said.
‘Well, I have passed the Old Took today! So that’s settled. And now

T H E G R E Y H AV E N S

1029

I think I am quite ready to go on another journey. Are you coming?’
‘Yes, I am coming,’ said Frodo. ‘The Ring-bearers should go
together.’
‘Where are you going, Master?’ cried Sam, though at last he understood what was happening.
‘To the Havens, Sam,’ said Frodo.
‘And I can’t come.’
‘No, Sam. Not yet anyway, not further than the Havens. Though
you too were a Ring-bearer, if only for a little while. Your time may
come. Do not be too sad, Sam. You cannot be always torn in two.
You will have to be one and whole, for many years. You have so
much to enjoy and to be, and to do.’
‘But,’ said Sam, and tears started in his eyes, ‘I thought you were
going to enjoy the Shire, too, for years and years, after all you have
done.’
‘So I thought too, once. But I have been too deeply hurt, Sam. I
tried to save the Shire, and it has been saved, but not for me. It must
often be so, Sam, when things are in danger: some one has to give
them up, lose them, so that others may keep them. But you are my
heir: all that I had and might have had I leave to you. And also you
have Rose, and Elanor; and Frodo-lad will come, and Rosie-lass, and
Merry, and Goldilocks, and Pippin; and perhaps more that I cannot
see. Your hands and your wits will be needed everywhere. You will
be the Mayor, of course, as long as you want to be, and the most
famous gardener in history; and you will read things out of the Red
Book, and keep alive the memory of the age that is gone, so that
people will remember the Great Danger and so love their beloved
land all the more. And that will keep you as busy and as happy as
anyone can be, as long as your part of the Story goes on.
‘Come now, ride with me!’
Then Elrond and Galadriel rode on; for the Third Age was over,
and the Days of the Rings were passed, and an end was come of the
story and song of those times. With them went many Elves of the
High Kindred who would no longer stay in Middle-earth; and among
them, ﬁlled with a sadness that was yet blessed and without bitterness,
rode Sam, and Frodo, and Bilbo, and the Elves delighted to honour
them.
Though they rode through the midst of the Shire all the evening
and all the night, none saw them pass, save the wild creatures; or
here and there some wanderer in the dark who saw a swift shimmer
under the trees, or a light and shadow ﬂowing through the grass as
the Moon went westward. And when they had passed from the Shire,
going about the south skirts of the White Downs, they came to the

1030

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Far Downs, and to the Towers, and looked on the distant Sea; and
so they rode down at last to Mithlond, to the Grey Havens in the
long ﬁrth of Lune.
As they came to the gates Cı́rdan the Shipwright came forth to
greet them. Very tall he was, and his beard was long, and he was
grey and old, save that his eyes were keen as stars; and he looked at
them and bowed, and said: ‘All is now ready.’
Then Cı́rdan led them to the Havens, and there was a white ship
lying, and upon the quay beside a great grey horse stood a ﬁgure
robed all in white awaiting them. As he turned and came towards
them Frodo saw that Gandalf now wore openly on his hand the Third
Ring, Narya the Great, and the stone upon it was red as ﬁre. Then
those who were to go were glad, for they knew that Gandalf also
would take ship with them.
But Sam was now sorrowful at heart, and it seemed to him that
if the parting would be bitter, more grievous still would be the long
road home alone. But even as they stood there, and the Elves were
going aboard, and all was being made ready to depart, up rode Merry
and Pippin in great haste. And amid his tears Pippin laughed.
‘You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo,’ he
said. ‘This time you have nearly succeeded, but you have failed again.
It was not Sam, though, that gave you away this time, but Gandalf
himself !’
‘Yes,’ said Gandalf; ‘for it will be better to ride back three together
than one alone. Well, here at last, dear friends, on the shores of the
Sea comes the end of our fellowship in Middle-earth. Go in peace!
I will not say: do not weep; for not all tears are an evil.’
Then Frodo kissed Merry and Pippin, and last of all Sam, and
went aboard; and the sails were drawn up, and the wind blew, and
slowly the ship slipped away down the long grey ﬁrth; and the light
of the glass of Galadriel that Frodo bore glimmered and was lost.
And the ship went out into the High Sea and passed on into the
West, until at last on a night of rain Frodo smelled a sweet fragrance
on the air and heard the sound of singing that came over the water.
And then it seemed to him that as in his dream in the house of
Bombadil, the grey rain-curtain turned all to silver glass and was
rolled back, and he beheld white shores and beyond them a far green
country under a swift sunrise.
But to Sam the evening deepened to darkness as he stood at the
Haven; and as he looked at the grey sea he saw only a shadow on
the waters that was soon lost in the West. There still he stood far
into the night, hearing only the sigh and murmur of the waves on
the shores of Middle-earth, and the sound of them sank deep into
his heart. Beside him stood Merry and Pippin, and they were silent.
*
*
*

T H E G R E Y H AV E N S

1031

At last the three companions turned away, and never again looking
back they rode slowly homewards; and they spoke no word to one
another until they came back to the Shire, but each had great comfort
in his friends on the long grey road.
At last they rode over the downs and took the East Road, and
then Merry and Pippin rode on to Buckland; and already they were
singing again as they went. But Sam turned to Bywater, and so came
back up the Hill, as day was ending once more. And he went on,
and there was yellow light, and ﬁre within; and the evening meal was
ready, and he was expected. And Rose drew him in, and set him in
his chair, and put little Elanor upon his lap.
He drew a deep breath. ‘Well, I’m back,’ he said.

1044

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Aragorn II, who became again King of both Gondor and Arnor. ‘Our King,
we call him; and when he comes north to his house in Annúminas restored
and stays for a while by Lake Evendim, then everyone in the Shire is glad.
But he does not enter this land and binds himself by the law that he has
made, that none of the Big People shall pass its borders. But he rides often
with many fair people to the Great Bridge, and there he welcomes his friends,
and any others who wish to see him; and some ride away with him and stay
in his house as long as they have a mind. Thain Peregrin has been there
many times; and so has Master Samwise the Mayor. His daughter Elanor
the Fair is one of the maids of Queen Evenstar.’
It was the pride and wonder of the Northern Line that, though their
power departed and their people dwindled, through all the many generations
the succession was unbroken from father to son. Also, though the length of
lives of the Dúnedain grew ever less in Middle-earth, after the ending of
their kings the waning was swifter in Gondor; and many of the Chieftains
of the North still lived to twice the age of Men, and far beyond the days of
even the oldest amongst us. Aragorn indeed lived to be two hundred and
ten years old, longer than any of his line since King Arvegil; but in Aragorn
Elessar the dignity of the kings of old was renewed.
(iv)
gondor and the heirs of anárion
There were thirty-one kings in Gondor after Anárion who was slain before
the Barad-dûr. Though war never ceased on their borders, for more than a
thousand years the Dúnedain of the South grew in wealth and power by
land and sea, until the reign of Atanatar II, who was called Alcarin, the
Glorious. Yet the signs of decay had then already appeared; for the high
men of the South married late, and their children were few. The ﬁrst childless
king was Falastur, and the second Narmacil I, the son of Atanatar Alcarin.
It was Ostoher the seventh king who rebuilt Minas Anor, where afterwards
the kings dwelt in summer rather than in Osgiliath. In his time Gondor was
ﬁrst attacked by wild men out of the East. But Tarostar, his son, defeated
them and drove them out, and took the name of Rómendacil ‘East-victor’.
He was, however, later slain in battle with fresh hordes of Easterlings. Turambar his son avenged him, and won much territory eastwards.
With Tarannon, the twelfth king, began the line of the Ship-kings, who built
navies and extended the sway of Gondor along the coasts west and south of the
Mouths of Anduin. To commemorate his victories as Captain of the Hosts,
Tarannon took the crown in the name of Falastur ‘Lord of the Coasts’.
Eärnil I, his nephew, who succeeded him, repaired the ancient haven of
Pelargir, and built a great navy. He laid siege by sea and land to Umbar, and
took it, and it became a great harbour and fortress of the power of Gondor.1
1
The great cape and land-locked ﬁrth of Umbar had been Númenórean land since
days of old; but it was a stronghold of the King’s Men, who were afterwards called
the Black Númenóreans, corrupted by Sauron, and who hated above all the followers

1090

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

2957–80 Aragorn undertakes his great journeys and errantries. As
Thorongil he serves in disguise both Thengel of Rohan and
Ecthelion II of Gondor.
2968 Birth of Frodo.
2976 Denethor weds Finduilas of Dol Amroth.
2977 Bain son of Bard becomes King of Dale.
2978 Birth of Boromir son of Denethor II.
2980 Aragorn enters Lórien, and there meets again Arwen Undómiel.
Aragorn gives her the ring of Barahir, and they plight their troth
upon the hill of Cerin Amroth. About this time Gollum reaches
the conﬁnes of Mordor and becomes acquainted with Shelob.
Théoden becomes King of Rohan. Birth of Samwise.
2983 Faramir son of Denethor born.
2984 Death of Ecthelion II. Denethor II becomes Steward of Gondor.
2988 Finduilas dies young.
2989 Balin leaves Erebor and enters Moria.
2991 Éomer Éomund’s son born in Rohan.
2994 Balin perishes, and the dwarf-colony is destroyed.
2995 Éowyn sister of Éomer born.
c. 3000 The shadow of Mordor lengthens. Saruman dares to use the
palantı́r of Orthanc, but becomes ensnared by Sauron, who has
the Ithil-stone. He becomes a traitor to the Council. His spies
report that the Shire is being closely guarded by the Rangers.
3001 Bilbo’s farewell feast. Gandalf suspects his ring to be the One
Ring. The guard on the Shire is doubled. Gandalf seeks for news
of Gollum and calls on the help of Aragorn.
3002 Bilbo becomes a guest of Elrond, and settles in Rivendell.
3004 Gandalf visits Frodo in the Shire, and does so at intervals during
the next four years.
3007 Brand son of Bain becomes King in Dale. Death of Gilraen.
3008 In the autumn Gandalf pays his last visit to Frodo.
3009 Gandalf and Aragorn renew their hunt for Gollum at intervals
during the next eight years, searching in the vales of Anduin,
Mirkwood, and Rhovanion to the conﬁnes of Mordor. At some
time during these years Gollum himself ventured into Mordor,
and was captured by Sauron. Elrond sends for Arwen, and she
returns to Imladris; the Mountains and all lands eastward are
becoming dangerous.
3017 Gollum is released from Mordor. He is taken by Aragorn in the
Dead Marshes, and brought to Thranduil in Mirkwood. Gandalf
visits Minas Tirith and reads the scroll of Isildur.

APPENDIX B

1091

the great years

12
20

3018
April
Gandalf reaches Hobbiton.
June
Sauron attacks Osgiliath. About the same time Thranduil is
attacked, and Gollum escapes.

Mid-year’s Day Gandalf meets Radagast.
4
10

July
Boromir sets out from Minas Tirith.
Gandalf imprisoned in Orthanc.
August
All trace of Gollum is lost. It is thought that at about this time,
being hunted both by the Elves and Sauron’s servants, he took
refuge in Moria; but when he had at last discovered the way to the
West-gate he could not get out.

18
19
20
21
22
23

24
26
27
28
29
30

1
3

September
Gandalf escapes from Orthanc in the early hours. The Black Riders
cross the Fords of Isen.
Gandalf comes to Edoras as a beggar, and is refused admittance.
Gandalf gains entrance to Edoras. Théoden commands him to go:
‘Take any horse, only be gone ere tomorrow is old!’
Gandalf meets Shadowfax, but the horse will not allow him to come
near. He follows Shadowfax far over the ﬁelds.
The Black Riders reach Sarn Ford at evening; they drive off the
guard of Rangers. Gandalf overtakes Shadowfax.
Four Riders enter the Shire before dawn. The others pursue the
Rangers eastward, and then return to watch the Greenway. A Black
Rider comes to Hobbiton at nightfall. Frodo leaves Bag End.
Gandalf having tamed Shadowfax rides from Rohan.
Gandalf crosses the Isen.
The Old Forest. Frodo comes to Bombadil.
Gandalf crosses Greyﬂood. Second night with Bombadil.
The Hobbits captured by a Barrow-wight. Gandalf reaches Sarn
Ford.
Frodo reaches Bree at night. Gandalf visits the Gaffer.
Crickhollow and the Inn at Bree are raided in the early hours. Frodo
leaves Bree. Gandalf comes to Crickhollow, and reaches Bree at night.
October
Gandalf leaves Bree.
He is attacked at night on Weathertop.

1092

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

6
9
11
13
18
20
24
25

The camp under Weathertop attacked at night. Frodo wounded.
Glorﬁndel leaves Rivendell.
He drives the Riders off the Bridge of Mitheithel.
Frodo crosses the Bridge.
Glorﬁndel ﬁnds Frodo at dusk. Gandalf reaches Rivendell.
Escape across the Ford of Bruinen.
Frodo recovers and wakes. Boromir arrives in Rivendell at night.
Council of Elrond.

25

December
The Company of the Ring leaves Rivendell at dusk.

8
11, 12
13
14
15
17
23
25

15
16
17
23
25
26

27
28
29

30

3019
January
The Company reach Hollin.
Snow on Caradhras.
Attack by Wolves in the early hours. The Company reaches Westgate of Moria at nightfall. Gollum begins to trail the Ring-bearer.
Night in Hall Twenty-one.
The Bridge of Khazad-dûm, and fall of Gandalf. The Company
reaches Nimrodel late at night.
The Company comes to Caras Galadhon at evening.
Gandalf pursues the Balrog to the peak of Zirakzigil.
He casts down the Balrog, and passes away. His body lies on the
peak.
February
The Mirror of Galadriel. Gandalf returns to life, and lies in a trance.
Farewell to Lórien. Gollum in hiding on the west bank observes
the departure.
Gwaihir bears Gandalf to Lórien.
The boats are attacked at night near Sarn Gebir.
The Company pass the Argonath and camp at Parth Galen. First
Battle of the Fords of Isen; Théodred son of Théoden slain.
Breaking of the Fellowship. Death of Boromir; his horn is heard in
Minas Tirith. Meriadoc and Peregrin captured. Frodo and Samwise
enter the eastern Emyn Muil. Aragorn sets out in pursuit of the
´
Orcs at evening. Eomer
hears of the descent of the Orc-band from
Emyn Muil.
´
Aragorn reaches the west-cliff at sunrise. Eomer
against Théoden’s
orders sets out from Eastfold about midnight to pursue the Orcs.
´
Eomer
overtakes the Orcs just outside Fangorn Forest.
Meriadoc and Pippin escape and meet Treebeard. The Rohirrim
attack at sunrise and destroy the Orcs. Frodo descends from the
Emyn Muil and meets Gollum. Faramir sees the funeral boat of
Boromir.
´
Entmoot begins. Eomer
returning to Edoras meets Aragorn.

APPENDIX B

1
2

3
4
5

6
7
8
9

10

11

12
13
14
15

1093

March
Frodo begins the passage of the Dead Marshes at dawn. Entmoot
continues. Aragorn meets Gandalf the White. They set out for
Edoras. Faramir leaves Minas Tirith on an errand to Ithilien.
Frodo comes to the end of the Marshes. Gandalf comes to Edoras
and heals Théoden. The Rohirrim ride west against Saruman.
Second Battle of Fords of Isen. Erkenbrand defeated. Entmoot
ends in afternoon. The Ents march on Isengard and reach it at
night.
Théoden retreats to Helm’s Deep. Battle of the Hornburg begins.
Ents complete the destruction of Isengard.
Théoden and Gandalf set out from Helm’s Deep for Isengard.
Frodo reaches the slag-mounds on the edge of the Desolation of
the Morannon.
Théoden reaches Isengard at noon. Parley with Saruman in Orthanc. Winged Nazgûl passes over the camp at Dol Baran. Gandalf
sets out with Peregrin for Minas Tirith. Frodo hides in sight of the
Morannon, and leaves at dusk.
Aragorn overtaken by the Dúnedain in the early hours. Théoden
sets out from the Hornburg for Harrowdale. Aragorn sets out later.
Frodo taken by Faramir to Henneth Annûn. Aragorn comes to
Dunharrow at nightfall.
Aragorn takes the ‘Paths of the Dead’ at daybreak; he reaches Erech
at midnight. Frodo leaves Henneth Annûn.
Gandalf reaches Minas Tirith. Faramir leaves Henneth Annûn.
Aragorn sets out from Erech and comes to Calembel. At dusk
Frodo reaches the Morgul-road. Théoden comes to Dunharrow.
Darkness begins to ﬂow out of Mordor.
The Dawnless Day. The Muster of Rohan: the Rohirrim ride from
Harrowdale. Faramir rescued by Gandalf outside the gates of the
City. Aragorn crosses Ringló. An army from the Morannon takes
Cair Andros and passes into Anórien. Frodo passes the Cross-roads,
and sees the Morgul-host set forth.
Gollum visits Shelob, but seeing Frodo asleep nearly repents.
Denethor sends Faramir to Osgiliath. Aragorn reaches Linhir and
crosses into Lebennin. Eastern Rohan is invaded from the north.
First assault on Lórien.
Gollum leads Frodo into Shelob’s lair. Faramir retreats to the Causeway Forts. Théoden camps under Min-Rimmon. Aragorn drives the
enemy towards Pelargir. The Ents defeat the invaders of Rohan.
Frodo captured by the Orcs of Cirith Ungol. The Pelennor is overrun. Faramir is wounded. Aragorn reaches Pelargir and captures
the ﬂeet. Théoden in Drúadan Forest.
Samwise ﬁnds Frodo in the Tower. Minas Tirith is besieged. The
Rohirrim led by the Wild Men come to the Grey Wood.
In the early hours the Witch-king breaks the Gates of the City.
Denethor burns himself on a pyre. The horns of the Rohirrim are
heard at cockcrow. Battle of the Pelennor. Théoden is slain.

1094

16
17
18
19
22
23
24
25

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

Aragorn raises the standard of Arwen. Frodo and Samwise escape
and begin their journey north along the Morgai. Battle under the
trees in Mirkwood; Thranduil repels the forces of Dol Guldur.
Second assault on Lórien.
Debate of the commanders. Frodo from the Morgai looks out over
the camp to Mount Doom.
Battle of Dale. King Brand and King Dáin Ironfoot fall. Many
Dwarves and Men take refuge in Erebor and are besieged. Shagrat
brings Frodo’s cloak, mail-shirt, and sword to Barad-dûr.
The Host of the West marches from Minas Tirith. Frodo comes
in sight of the Isenmouthe; he is overtaken by Orcs on the road
from Durthang to Udûn.
The Host comes to Morgul Vale. Frodo and Samwise escape and
begin their journey along the road to the Barad-dûr.
The dreadful nightfall. Frodo and Samwise leave the road and turn
south to Mount Doom. Third assault on Lórien.
The Host passes out of Ithilien. Aragorn dismisses the faint-hearted.
Frodo and Samwise cast away their arms and gear.
Frodo and Samwise make their last journey to the feet of Mount
Doom. The Host camps in the Desolation of the Morannon.
The Host is surrounded on the Slag-hills. Frodo and Samwise reach
the Sammath Naur. Gollum seizes the Ring and falls in the Cracks
of Doom. Downfall of Barad-dûr and passing of Sauron.

After the fall of the Dark Tower and the passing of Sauron the Shadow was
lifted from the hearts of all who opposed him, but fear and despair fell
upon his servants and allies. Three times Lórien had been assailed from Dol
Guldur, but besides the valour of the elven people of that land, the power
that dwelt there was too great for any to overcome, unless Sauron had come
there himself. Though grievous harm was done to the fair woods on the
borders, the assaults were driven back; and when the Shadow passed, Celeborn came forth and led the host of Lórien over Anduin in many boats.
They took Dol Guldur, and Galadriel threw down its walls and laid bare its
pits, and the forest was cleansed.
In the North also there had been war and evil. The realm of Thranduil
was invaded, and there was long battle under the trees and great ruin of ﬁre;
but in the end Thranduil had the victory. And on the day of the New Year
of the Elves, Celeborn and Thranduil met in the midst of the forest; and
they renamed Mirkwood Eryn Lasgalen, The Wood of Greenleaves. Thranduil took all the northern region as far as the mountains that rise in the forest
for his realm; and Celeborn took all the southern wood below the Narrows,
and named it East Lórien; all the wide forest between was given to the
Beornings and the Woodmen. But after the passing of Galadriel in a few
years Celeborn grew weary of his realm and went to Imladris to dwell with
the sons of Elrond. In the Greenwood the Silvan Elves remained untroubled,
but in Lórien there lingered sadly only a few of its former people, and there
was no longer light or song in Caras Galadhon.
*
*
*

APPENDIX B

1095

At the same time as the great armies besieged Minas Tirith a host of the
allies of Sauron that had long threatened the borders of King Brand crossed
the River Carnen, and Brand was driven back to Dale. There he had the aid
of the Dwarves of Erebor; and there was a great battle at the Mountain’s
feet. It lasted three days, but in the end both King Brand and King Dáin
Ironfoot were slain, and the Easterlings had the victory. But they could not
take the Gate, and many, both Dwarves and Men, took refuge in Erebor,
and there withstood a siege.
When news came of the great victories in the South, then Sauron’s northern army was ﬁlled with dismay; and the besieged came forth and routed
them, and the remnant ﬂed into the East and troubled Dale no more. Then
Bard II, Brand’s son, became King in Dale, and Thorin III Stonehelm,
Dáin’s son, became King under the Mountain. They sent their ambassadors
to the crowning of King Elessar; and their realms remained ever after, as
long as they lasted, in friendship with Gondor; and they were under the
crown and protection of the King of the West.
the chief days from the fall of barad-dû r
to the end of the third age 1
3019
S.R. 1419
March 27. Bard II and Thorin III Stonehelm drive the enemy from Dale.
28. Celeborn crosses Anduin; destruction of Dol Guldur begun.
April 6. Meeting of Celeborn and Thranduil.
8. The Ring-bearers are honoured on the Field of Cormallen.
May 1. Crowning of King Elessar; Elrond and Arwen set out from
Rivendell.
´
´
8. Eomer
and Eowyn
depart for Rohan with the sons of Elrond.
20. Elrond and Arwen come to Lórien.
27. The escort of Arwen leaves Lórien.
June 14. The sons of Elrond meet the escort and bring Arwen to Edoras.
16. They set out for Gondor.
25. King Elessar ﬁnds the sapling of the White Tree.
1 Lithe. Arwen comes to the City.
Mid-year’s Day. Wedding of Elessar and Arwen.
´
July 18. Eomer
returns to Minas Tirith.
22. The funeral escort of King Théoden sets out.
August 7. The escort comes to Edoras.
10. Funeral of King Théoden.
´
14. The guests take leave of King Eomer.
15. Treebeard releases Saruman.
18. They come to Helm’s Deep.
22. They come to Isengard; they take leave of the King of the West at
sunset.
28. They overtake Saruman; Saruman turns towards the Shire.
1

Months and days are given according to the Shire Calendar.

1096

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

September 6. They halt in sight of the Mountains of Moria.
13. Celeborn and Galadriel depart, the others set out for Rivendell.
21. They return to Rivendell.
22. The hundred and twenty-ninth birthday of Bilbo. Saruman comes
to the Shire.
October 5. Gandalf and the Hobbits leave Rivendell.
6. They cross the Ford of Bruinen; Frodo feels the ﬁrst return of pain.
28. They reach Bree at nightfall.
30. They leave Bree. The ‘Travellers’ come to the Brandywine Bridge
at dark.
November 1. They are arrested at Frogmorton.
2. They come to Bywater and rouse the Shire-folk.
3. Battle of Bywater, and Passing of Saruman. End of the War of the
Ring.
3020
S.R. 1420: The Great Year of Plenty
March 13. Frodo is taken ill (on the anniversary of his poisoning by
Shelob).
April 6. The mallorn ﬂowers in the Party Field.
May 1. Samwise marries Rose.
Mid-year’s Day. Frodo resigns ofﬁce of mayor, and Will Whitfoot is
restored.
September 22. Bilbo’s hundred and thirtieth birthday.
October 6. Frodo is again ill.
3021
S.R. 1421: The Last of the Third Age
March 13. Frodo is again ill.
25. Birth of Elanor the Fair,1 daughter of Samwise. On this day the
Fourth Age began in the reckoning of Gondor.
September 21. Frodo and Samwise set out from Hobbiton.
22. They meet the Last Riding of the Keepers of the Rings in Woody
End.
29. They come to the Grey Havens. Frodo and Bilbo depart over Sea
with the Three Keepers. The end of the Third Age.
October 6. Samwise returns to Bag End.
later events concerning the members
of the fellowship of the ring
s.r.
1422 With the beginning of this year the Fourth Age began in the count
1
She became known as ‘the Fair’ because of her beauty; many said that she looked
more like an elf-maid than a hobbit. She had golden hair, which had been very rare
in the Shire; but two others of Samwise’s daughters were also golden-haired, and so
were many of the children born at this time.

APPENDIX B

1427

1430
1431
1432
1434
1436

1441
1442
1448
1451
1452
1454
1455
1462

1463
1469
1482

1484

1

1097

of years in the Shire; but the numbers of the years of Shire Reckoning
were continued.
Will Whitfoot resigns. Samwise is elected Mayor of the Shire. Peregrin
Took marries Diamond of Long Cleeve. King Elessar issues an edict
that Men are not to enter the Shire, and he makes it a Free Land
under the protection of the Northern Sceptre.
Faramir, son of Peregrin, born.
Goldilocks, daughter of Samwise, born.
Meriadoc, called the Magniﬁcent, becomes Master of Buckland.
´
´
Great gifts are sent to him by King Eomer
and the Lady Eowyn
of
Ithilien.
Peregrin becomes the Took and Thain. King Elessar makes the Thain,
the Master, and the Mayor Counsellors of the North-kingdom. Master
Samwise is elected Mayor for the second time.
King Elessar rides north, and dwells for a while by Lake Evendim.
He comes to the Brandywine Bridge, and there greets his friends. He
gives the Star of the Dúnedain to Master Samwise, and Elanor is
made a maid of honour to Queen Arwen.
Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the third time.
Master Samwise and his wife and Elanor ride to Gondor and stay
there for a year. Master Tolman Cotton acts as deputy Mayor.
Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the fourth time.
Elanor the Fair marries Fastred of Greenholm on the Far Downs.
The Westmarch, from the Far Downs to the Tower Hills (Emyn
Beraid),1 is added to the Shire by the gift of the King. Many hobbits
remove to it.
Elfstan Fairbairn, son of Fastred and Elanor, is born.
Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the ﬁfth time.
Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the sixth time. At his request
the Thain makes Fastred Warden of Westmarch. Fastred and Elanor
make their dwelling at Undertowers on the Tower Hills, where their
descendants, the Fairbairns of the Towers, dwelt for many generations.
Faramir Took marries Goldilocks, daughter of Samwise.
Master Samwise becomes Mayor for the seventh and last time, being
in 1476, at the end of his ofﬁce, ninety-six years old.
Death of Mistress Rose, wife of Master Samwise, on Mid-year’s Day.
On September 22 Master Samwise rides out from Bag End. He comes
to the Tower Hills, and is last seen by Elanor, to whom he gives the
Red Book afterwards kept by the Fairbairns. Among them the tradition is handed down from Elanor that Samwise passed the Towers,
and went to the Grey Havens, and passed over Sea, last of the Ringbearers.
In the spring of the year a message came from Rohan to Buckland
´
that King Eomer
wished to see Master Holdwine once again. Meriadoc was then old (102) but still hale. He took counsel with his friend

p. 7; p. 1042, note 2.

1098

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

the Thain, and soon after they handed over their goods and ofﬁces
to their sons and rode away over the Sarn Ford, and they were not
seen again in the Shire. It was heard after that Master Meriadoc came
´
to Edoras and was with King Eomer
before he died in that autumn.
Then he and Thain Peregrin went to Gondor and passed what short
years were left to them in that realm, until they died and were laid
in Rath Dı́nen among the great of Gondor.
1541 In this year1 on March 1st came at last the Passing of King Elessar.
It is said that the beds of Meriadoc and Peregrin were set beside the
bed of the great king. Then Legolas built a grey ship in Ithilien, and
sailed down Anduin and so over Sea; and with him, it is said, went
Gimli the Dwarf. And when that ship passed an end was come in
Middle-earth of the Fellowship of the Ring.

1

Fourth Age (Gondor) 120.

APPENDIX C
FAMILY TREES
The names given in these Trees are only a selection from many. Most of
them are either guests at Bilbo’s Farewell Party, or their direct ancestors. The
guests at the Party are underlined. A few other names of persons concerned in
the events recounted are also given. In addition some genealogical information is provided concerning Samwise the founder of the family of Gardner,
later famous and inﬂuential.
The ﬁgures after the names are those of birth (and death where that is
recorded). All dates are given according to the Shire-reckoning, calculated
from the crossing of the Brandywine by the brothers Marcho and Blanco in
the Year 1 of the Shire (Third Age 1601).

APPENDIX D

1107

THE CALENDARS
The Calendar in the Shire differed in several features from ours. The year
no doubt was of the same length,1 for long ago as those times are now
reckoned in years and lives of men, they were not very remote according to
the memory of the Earth. It is recorded by the Hobbits that they had no
‘week’ when they were still a wandering people, and though they had
‘months’, governed more or less by the Moon, their keeping of dates and
calculations of time were vague and inaccurate. In the west-lands of Eriador,
when they had begun to settle down, they adopted the Kings’ Reckoning of
the Dúnedain, which was ultimately of Eldarin origin; but the Hobbits of
the Shire introduced several minor alterations. This calendar, or ‘Shire Reckoning’ as it was called, was eventually adopted also in Bree, except for the
Shire usage of counting as Year 1 the year of the colonization of the Shire.
It is often difﬁcult to discover from old tales and traditions precise information about things which people knew well and took for granted in their
own day (such as the names of letters, or of the days of the week, or the names
and lengths of months). But owing to their general interest in genealogy, and
to the interest in ancient history which the learned amongst them developed
after the War of the Ring, the Shire-hobbits seem to have concerned themselves a good deal with dates; and they even drew up complicated tables
showing the relations of their own system with others. I am not skilled in
these matters, and may have made many errors; but at any rate the chronology
of the crucial years S.R. 1418, 1419 is so carefully set out in the Red Book
that there cannot be much doubt about days and times at that point.
It seems clear that the Eldar in Middle-earth, who had, as Samwise remarked,
more time at their disposal, reckoned in long periods, and the Quenya word
yén, often translated ‘year’ (p. 377), really means 144 of our years. The Eldar
preferred to reckon in sixes and twelves as far as possible. A ‘day’ of the sun
they called ré and reckoned from sunset to sunset. The yén contained 52,596
days. For ritual rather than practical purposes the Eldar observed a week or
enquië of six days; and the yén contained 8,766 of these enquier, reckoned
continuously throughout the period.
In Middle-earth the Eldar also observed a short period or solar year,
called a coranar or ‘sun-round’ when considered more or less astronomically,
but usually called loa ‘growth’ (especially in the north-western lands) when
the seasonal changes in vegetation were primarily considered, as was usual
with the Elves generally. The loa was broken up into periods that might be
regarded either as long months or short seasons. These no doubt varied in
different regions; but the Hobbits only provide information concerning the
Calendar of Imladris. In that calendar there were six of these ‘seasons’, of
which the Quenya names were tuilë, lairë, yávië, quellë, hrı́vë, coirë, which
may be translated ‘spring, summer, autumn, fading, winter, stirring’. The
Sindarin names were ethuil, laer, iavas, ﬁrith, rhı̂w, echuir. ‘Fading’ was also
called lasse-lanta ‘leaf-fall’, or in Sindarin narbeleth ‘sun-waning’.
1

365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 46 seconds.

1112

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

The New Reckoning was begun in the restored Kingdom in T.A. 3019.
It represented a return to Kings’ Reckoning adapted to ﬁt a spring-beginning
as in the Eldarin loa.1
In the New Reckoning the year began on March 25 old style, in commemoration of the fall of Sauron and the deeds of the Ring-bearers. The months
retained their former names, beginning now with Vı́ressë (April), but referred
to periods beginning generally ﬁve days earlier than previously. All the
months had 30 days. There were 3 Enderi or Middle-days (of which the
second was called Loëndë), between Yavannië (September) and Narquelië
(October), that corresponded with September 23, 24, 25 old style. But in
honour of Frodo Yavannië 30, which corresponded with former September
22, his birthday, was made a festival, and the leap-year was provided for by
doubling this feast, called Cormarë or Ringday.
The Fourth Age was held to have begun with the departure of Master
Elrond, which took place in September 3021; but for purposes of record in
the Kingdom Fourth Age 1 was the year that began according to the New
Reckoning in March 25, 3021, old style.
This reckoning was in the course of the reign of King Elessar adopted in
all his lands except the Shire, where the old calendar was retained and Shire
Reckoning was continued. Fourth Age 1 was thus called 1422; and in so far
as the Hobbits took any account of the change of Age, they maintained that
it began with 2 Yule 1422, and not in the previous March.
There is no record of the Shire-folk commemorating either March 25
or September 22; but in the Westfarthing, especially in the country round
Hobbiton Hill, there grew up a custom of making holiday and dancing in
the Party Field, when weather permitted, on April 6. Some said that it was
old Sam Gardner’s birthday, some that it was the day on which the Golden
Tree ﬁrst ﬂowered in 1420, and some that it was the Elves’ New Year. In the
Buckland the Horn of the Mark was blown at sundown every November 2 and
bonﬁres and feastings followed.2

1
Though actually the yestarë of New Reckoning occurred earlier than in the Calendar
of Imladris, in which it corresponded more or less with Shire April 6.
2
Anniversary of its ﬁrst blowing in the Shire in 3019.

1138

THE LORD OF THE RINGS

noted, the Hobbits had once spoken a language closely related to that of the Rohirrim,
it seems likely that kuduk was a worn-down form of kûd-dûkan. The latter I have
translated, for reasons explained, by holbytla; and hobbit provides a word that might
well be a worn-down form of holbytla, if that name had occurred in our own ancient
language.
Gamgee. According to family tradition, set out in the Red Book, the surname Galbasi,
or in reduced form Galpsi, came from the village of Galabas, popularly supposed to
be derived from galab- ‘game’ and an old element bas-, more or less equivalent to our
wick, wich. Gamwich (pronounced Gammidge) seemed therefore a very fair rendering.
However, in reducing Gammidgy to Gamgee, to represent Galpsi, no reference was
intended to the connexion of Samwise with the family of Cotton, though a jest of
that kind would have been hobbit-like enough, had there been any warrant in their
language.
Cotton, in fact, represents Hlothran, a fairly common village-name in the Shire,
derived from hloth, ‘a two-roomed dwelling or hole’, and ran(u) a small group of such
dwellings on a hill-side. As a surname it may be an alteration of hlothram(a) ‘cottager’.
Hlothram, which I have rendered Cotman, was the name of Farmer Cotton’s grandfather.
Brandywine. The hobbit-names of this river were alterations of the Elvish Baranduin
(accented on and), derived from baran ‘golden brown’ and duin ‘(large) river’. Of
Baranduin Brandywine seemed a natural corruption in modern times. Actually the
older hobbit-name was Branda-nı̂n ‘border-water’, which would have been more closely
rendered by Marchbourn; but by a jest that had become habitual, referring again to
its colour, at this time the river was usually called Bralda-hı̂m ‘heady ale’.
It must be observed, however, that when the Oldbucks (Zaragamba) changed
their name to Brandybuck (Brandagamba), the ﬁrst element meant ‘borderland’, and
Marchbuck would have been nearer. Only a very bold hobbit would have ventured to
call the Master of Buckland Braldagamba in his hearing.

